AU  - S. D. a = Porter, [Initials follow last name separated by a comma; terms like Jr., III, de, and von should be placed after the initials preceded by a second comma.]
TI  - Impact of temperature on colony growth and developmental rates of the ant, Solenopsis invicta [no period after title]
SO  - J. Insect Physiol. 1988;34(12)([not used; place (issue#) after volume number]):1127-1133
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; growth; development rate; physiology; temperature; degree days; nanitic brood; [words in title do not need to be repeated in keywords]
AB  - [include if possible]  Growth rates of the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, were studied across a range of constant temperatures.  Growth in established colonies only occurred at rather warm temperatures: between 24 and 36 C, with maximal growth around 32 C.  Colony growth ceased below 24 C even though 17 C was the theoretical minimum for brood development.  Total developmental time (egg to adult) for minor worker brood decreased from 55 days at 24 C to 23 days at 35 C.  The proportion of time required by each developmental stage (i.e. eggs, larvae, pupae) was independent of temperature.  Nanitic brood developed about 35% faster than did minor worker brood, an important benefit for founding colonies.   Data are still fragmentary, but it appears that temperature-adjusted development rates of ants and other social Hymenoptera are quite similar. [no tabs or hard returns, please.]
AU  - D. P. a = Wojcik
TI  - Biology of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) and their relationships to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) [no period after title]
1975:[this field is not used in thesis type]
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; Mississippi; scientific; symbiont; biocontrol; [words in title do not need to be repeated in keywords]
AB  - [include if possible]
AU  - C. R. Allen, E. A. Forys, K. G. Rice and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Are red imported fire ants a threat to hatching sea turtles?  [abstract]
1997;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; invasive species; ecological invasion; bites; stings; Chelonia mydas; sea turtles; young animals; mortality; hatching; Pseudomys nelsoni; 
AB  - Red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) have been observed foraging in Loggerhead (Caretta caretta) & Green Turtle (Chelonia mydas) nests in Florida. Solenopsis invicta are attracted to mucous and moisture, and may establish foraging tunnels into sea turtle nests shortly after egg-laying, making pipping turtles vulnerable to predation. To test the potential impact of S. invicta on pipping sea turtles, we conducted experiments on a surrogate species (Pseudomys nelsoni). Over 70% of the viable hatchlings were killed by S. invicta during pipping or shortly after hatching. Beach surveys indicate that S. invicta are abundant on beaches and dunes throughout Florida.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - C. R. Allen, E. A. Forys, K. G. Rice and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Are red imported fire ants a threat to hatching sea turtles?  [abstract]
SO  - S. P. Epperly and J. Braun, compilers. Proceedings of the 17th Annual Sea Turtle Symposium, 4-8 March 1997, Orlando, Florida, U.S.A., U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-SEFSC-415 1998(1997):120
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; biology; impact; ecological; wildlife; sea turtles; 
AB  - Red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) have been observed foraging in loggerhead (Caretta caretta) and green turtle (Chelonia mydas) nests in Florida.  Solenopsis invicta are attracted to mucous and moisture, and may establish foraging tunnels into sea turtle nests shortly after egg-laying, making pipping turtles vulnerable to predation.  To test the potential impact of S. invicta on pipping sea turtles, we conducted experiments on a surrogate species (Pseudomys nelsoni).  Over 70% of the viable hatchlings were killed by S. invicta during pipping or shortly after hatching.  Initial beach surveys indicate that S. invicta are abundant on beaches and dunes throughout Florida.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - C. R. Allen, E. A. Forys, K. G. Rice and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Effects of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) on hatching turtles and prevalence of fire ants on sea turtle nesting beaches in Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2001;84(2):250-253
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; ecological; Emydidae; turtles; nest; invasion; predation; hatching; hatch; infestation; distribution; breeding places; beaches; Caretta caretta; Chelonia mydas; endangered species; invasive species; Pseudcmys nelsoni; turtle nests; 
AB  - Red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta Buren) have increasingly been observed in logger-head (Caretta caretta L.) and green (Chelonia mydas L.) sea turtle nests in Florida, and in the nests of freshwater turtles. They may be attracted to the disturbance, mucous and moisture associated with turtle nesting and establish foraging tunnels into turtle nests shortly after egglaying, thus increasing the vulnerability of hatchlings to fire ant predation. We conducted experiments on a freshwater turtle (Pseudemys nelsoni Carr) to determine the potential impacts of S. invicta on turtle hatchlings. Over 70% of hatchlings were killed by S. invicta during piping or shortly after hatching. To determine the extent of S. invicta infestation of sea turtle nesting beaches, we sampled known nesting beaches throughout the state of Florida. Beach surveys indicated that S. invicta are present and often abundant on most beaches and dunes along the Florida coast.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - C. R. Allen, L. G. Pearlstine and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Gap Analysis for ant species
SO  - Gap Anal. Bull. 1998;7:10-14
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Conomyrma flavopectus; Crematogaster vermiculata; Leptogenys manni; Leptothorax allardycei; Odontomachus clarus; Paratrechina phantasma; Paratrechina wojciki; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Xenomyrmex floridanus; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Ponerinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; ecological; biodiversity; habitat; Gap Analysis Program; spatial analysis; species richness; 

AU  - C. R. Allen, L. G. Pearlstine, D. P. Wojcik and W. M. Kitchens
TI  - The spatial distribution of diversity between disparate taxa: Spatial correspondence between mammals and ants across South Florida, USA
SO  - Landscape Ecol. 2001;16(5):453-464
MH  - ant; Formicidae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; ecological; biodiversity; Gap Analysis Program; scale; spatial analysis; spatial correspondence; species richness; 
AB  - Gap Analysis takes a proactive landscape-level approach to conserving native species by identifying nodes of high biological diversity. It uses vertebrate species richness as an index of overall biological diversity. However, it remains unknown whether or not the spatial distribution of vertebrate diversity corresponds with the diversity of other taxa. We tested whether landscape-level diversity patterns corresponded between a vertebrate and an invertebrate taxon, mammals and ants, across the southern half of the Florida peninsula, USA. Composite digital maps with a 30-m spatial resolution were produced for each taxon. Spatial correspondence between the taxa was determined by normalizing and then subtracting the composite maps. There were large areas of spatial correspondence -- indicating that richness between mammals and ants was similar over much of southern Florida. However, spatial correspondence occurred where the richness of both taxa was low or moderate, and areas with the highest species richness (highest 20%) for each taxon, the explicit focus of Gap Analyses, corresponded over only 8752 ha. Gap Analysis provides a much needed assessment of landscape-level diversity patterns and proactive reserve design, but it must be explicit that the results are applicable for vertebrate diversity, which does not necessarily correspond with diversity patterns of other taxa. The two taxa investigated differ by orders of magnitude in the scale that they perceive their environment, and it is likely that diversity hotspots vary as the scale of investigation - and the taxa mapped - vary.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - C. R. Allen, K. G. Rice, D. P. Wojcik and H. F. Percival
TI  - Effect of red imported fire ant envenomization on neonatal American alligators
SO  - J. Herpetol. 1997;31(2):318-321
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; venom; impact; ecological; wildlife; reptile; Alligator mississippiensis; American alligator; body mass; growth rate; body weight; sting; nonlethal effect; exotic species; invasive species; 
AB  - An increasing body of evidence implicates the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) in the decline of some vertebrate populations. However, few studies have documented the modes of impact. We tested the effects of stinging by S. invicta on the body mass of hatchling American alligators and the vulnerability of alligator eggs to S. invicta predation prior to hatching. Alligator eggs were brached and contents utilized as a food source by S. invicta only if irregularities existed on the egg surface. Pipping alligators in a semi-natural laboratory setting were stung heavily by S. invicta. Direct mortality was low, however, the body mass of stung individuals was lower than that of control individuals. Differences in body mass remained at 3 weeks post-tratment. This effect may lead to decreased survival of impacted juvenile alligators.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - G. R. Almany, M. P. De Arruda, W. Arthofer, Z. K. Atallah, S. R. Beissinger, M. L. Berumen, S. M. Bogdanowicz, S. D. Brown, M. W. Bruford, C. Burdine, J. W. Busch, N. R. Campbell, D. Carey, B. C. Carstens, K. H. Chu, M. A. Cubeta, J. P. Cuda, Z. Cui, L. E. Datnoff, J. A. Dávila, E. S. Davis, R. M. Davis, O. E. Diekmann, E. Eizirik, J. A. Fargallo, F. Fernandes, H. Fukuda, L. R. Gale, E. Gallagher, Y. Gao, P. Girard, A. Godhe, E. C. Gonçalves, L. Gouveia, A. M. Grajczyk, M. J. Grose, Z. Gu, C. Halldén, K. A. Härnström, A. H. Hemmingsen, G. D. Holmes, C. H. Huang, C. C. Huang, S. P. Hudman, G. P. Jones, L. Kanetis, I. Karunasagar, I. Karunasagar, N. Keyghobadi, S. J. Klosterman, P. E. Klug, J. Koch, M. M. Koopman, K. Köppler, E. Koshimizu, S. Krumböck, T. Kubisiak, J. B. Landis, M. L. Lasta, C. Y. Lee, Q. Li, S. H. Li, R. C. Lin, M. Liu, N. Liu, W. C. Liu, Y. Liu, A. Loiseau, W. Luan, K. K. Maruthachalam, H. M. Mccormick, R. Mellick, P. J. Monnahan, E. Morielle-Versute, T. E. Murray, S. R. Narum, K. Neufeld, P. J. G. deNova, P. S. Ojiambo, N. Okamoto, A. S. Othman, W. A. Overholt, R. Pardini, I. G. Paterson, O. A. Patty, R. J. Paxton, S. Planes, C. Porter, M. S. Pratchett, T. Püttker, G. Rasic, B. Rasool, O. Rey, M. Riegler, C. Riehl, J. M. K. Roberts, P. D. Roberts, E. H. Rochel, K. J. Roe, M. O. Rossetto, et al.
TI  - Permanent genetic resources added to Molecular Ecology Resources Database 1 May 2009-31 July 2009
SO  - Mol. Ecol. Resour. 2009;9(6):1460-1466
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Wasmannia auropunctata; Myrmicinae; scientific; genetics; microsatellite marker loci; Single Nucleotide Polymorphism sequencing primers; Molecular Ecology Resources Database; loci; sequencing primer pairs; allele specific primers; allele specific probes; 
AB  - This article documents the addition of 512 microsatellite marker loci and nine pairs of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) sequencing primers to the Molecular Ecology Resources Database. Loci were developed for the following species: ......... Wasmannia auropunctata....   These loci were cross-tested on the following species: ........    This article also documents the addition of nine sequencing primer pairs and sixteen allele specific primers or probes for Oncorhynchus mykiss and Oncorhynchus tshawytscha; these primers and assays were cross-tested in both species.
AU  - W. A. Banks, C. T. Adams, C. S. Lofgren and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Imported fire ant infestation of soybean fields in the southern United States
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1990;73(3):503-504
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; South Carolina; scientific; distribution; population; mound; impact; agricultural; economic; soybean; 

AU  - W. A. Banks, D. M. Hicks, J. K. Plumley, D. P. Jouvenaz, D. P. Wojcik and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - Imported fire ants: 10-5, an alternate formulation of mirex bait
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1976;69(4):465-467
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Georgia; Florida; scientific; mating flight; population; mound; chemical control; reinfestation; bait; 
AB  - The formulation of mirex bait was modified so the soybean oil was applied to the corncob grits at 2 times; mirex was included in only the 2nd application. The bait (called 10-5) contained only 1/3 (0.1%) as much  toxicant as the standard 4x bait (0.3%). The procedure concentrated the toxicant on or near the surface of the grits, which made the mirex more available to Solenopsis invicta Buren and S. richteri Forel. In 3 field tests against natural infestations of S. invicta with 10-5, the control obtained was comparable to that obtained with the standard.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - W. A. Banks, D. P. Jouvenaz, D. P. Wojcik and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - Observations on fire ants, Solenopsis spp., in Mato Grosso, Brazil
SO  - Sociobiology 1985;11(2):143-152
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; ecology; biology; mating; flight; colony size; temperature; caste; ecology; distribution; population density; mound; behavior; symbiont; predator; parasite; Orasema; Eucharitidae; myrmecophile; Scarabaeidae; Histeridae; Staphylinidae; Thysanura; millipede; Diplopoda; Solenopsis (Labauchena); biocontrol; 
AB  - Mounds of the imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, observed in its native habitat in the state of Mato Grosso, Brazil, were typically smaller than those observed in the southern United States.  Mound size varied somewhat with colony size but more so with the moisture level of the soil.  The ants were most common in areas disturbed by human activity and were more abundant in areas disturbed within 1-2 years of the survey than in areas undisturbed for longer periods.  Most colonies observed were mature.  Arthropods encountered frequently in ant nests included the parasitic wasp, Orasema sp. (Eucharitidae), myrmecophilous beetles (Scarabaeidae, Histeridae, Staphylinidae), Thysanura, and millipedes.  The socially parasitic ants, Solenopsis (Labauchena) spp., common in Uruguay and Argentina, appear to be rare in Mato Grosso.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - W. A. Banks, C. S. Lofgren, D. P. Jouvenaz, C. E. Stringer, P. M. Bishop, D. F. Williams, D. P. Wojcik and B. M. Glancey
TI  - Techniques for collecting, rearing, and handling imported fire ants
1981;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; scientific; biology; colony; caste; diet; ecology; methods; handling; rearing; collecting; 
AB  - Described are techniques for collecting and handling whole or partial field colonies of red and black imported fire ants; methods and equipment for collecting newly mated queens and for rearing laboratory colonies; and techniques for adding new queens to established colonies, and using vacuum pickup systems with ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - W. A. Banks, C. S. Lofgren, D. P. Jouvenaz, D. P. Wojcik and J. W. Summerlin
TI  - An improved mirex bait formulation for control of imported fire ants
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1973;2(2):182-185
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Georgia; scientific; mating flight; population; mound; chemical control; bait; reinfestation; 
AB  - A new method was developed for for formulating mirex bait for control of Solenopsis richteri Forel and Solenopsis invicta Buren.  The mirex is incorporated into the outer layer of soybean oil on the corncob grits and the bait is coated with an acrylic latex.  The oil content of the formulation can be increased by one-third, thus more oil or food attractant is available to the ants.  Incorporation of the mirex in the oil on the surface of the grits makes a greater percentage of the insecticide available to the ants (89 vs. 55% in the standard bait).  Field tests in Georgia with aerial applicalions of the new formulation against S. invicta showed that the coated bait containing 0.1% mirex and applied at 1.0 lb per acre gave control comparable to standard bait containing 0.3% mirex applied at a rate of 1 1/4 lb per acre (99.6 vs. 99.1%, respectively).   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - W. A. Banks, C. S. Lofgren and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - A bibliography of imported fire ants and the chemicals and methods used for their control
1978;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; bibliography; chemistry; biology; taxonomy; morphology; physiology; genetics; ecology; behavior; symbiont; predator; parasite; pathogen; impact; control; 

AU  - P. A. Barriga, J. V. Sloan, S. D. Porter and C. L. Sagers
TI  - Stable isotope enrichment in laboratory ant colonies: effects of colony age, metamorphosis, diet, and fat storage
SO  - Entomol. Exp. Appl. 2013;149(3):265-272
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsidini; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; metamorphosis; diet; lipid storage on carbon; nitrogen; stable isotope ratios isotope discrimination; metamorphic enrichment; 
AB  - Ecologists use stable isotopes to infer diets and trophic levels of animals in food webs, yet some assumptions underlying these inferences have not been thoroughly tested. We used laboratory-reared colonies of Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsidini) to test the effects of metamorphosis, diet, and lipid storage on carbon and nitrogen stable isotope ratios. Effects of metamorphosis were examined in ant colonies maintained on a control diet of domestic crickets and sucrose solution. Effects of a diet shift were evaluated by adding a tuna supplement to select colonies. Effects of lipid content on stable isotopes were tested by treating worker ants with polar and non-polar solvents. δ13C and δ15N values of larvae, pupae, and workers were measured by mass spectrometry on whole-animal preparations. We found a significant effect of colony age on δ13C, but not δ15N; larvae, pupae, and workers collected at 75 days were slightly depleted in 13C relative to collections at 15 days (Δδ13C = −0.27‰). Metamorphosis had a significant effect on δ15N, but not δ13C; tissues of each successive developmental stage were increasingly enriched in 15N (pupae, +0.5‰; workers, +1.4‰). Availability of tuna resulted in further shifts of about +0.6‰ in isotope ratios for all developmental stages. Removing fat with organic solvents had no effect on δ13C, but treatment with a non-polar solvent resulted in enriched δ15N values of +0.37‰. Identifying regular patterns of isotopic enrichment as described here should improve the utility of stable isotopes in diet studies of insects. Our study suggests that researchers using 15N enrichment to assess trophic levels of an organism at different sites need to take care not to standardize with immature insect herbivores or predators at one site and mature ones at another. Similar problems may also exist when standardizing with holometabolous insects at one site and spiders or hemimetabolous insects at another site.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. N. Bieman and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Tracking ants in Florida: The results of a Florida ant survey and a key to common structure-invading ants
SO  - PCO, FPCA Service Mag. 1990;4(April):cover, 11-13
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Camponotus americanus; Camponotus floridanus; Monomorium floricola; Monomorium pharaonis; Paratrechina longicornis; Paratrechina parvula; Pheidole floridana; Pseudomyrmex mexicanus; Solenopsis invicta; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Tetramorium simillimum; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; popular; taxonomy; key; biology; ecology; habits; 

AU  - M. A. Bowers and S. D. Porter
TI  - Effect of foraging distance on water content of substrates harvested by Atta colombica (Guerin)
SO  - Ecology 1981;62:273-275
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Atta columbica; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; Panama; scientific; ecology; behavior; foraging; selection; foraging distance; water content; substrates; 

AU  - J. Briano, D. Jouvenaz, D. Wojcik, R. Patterson and H. Cordo
TI  - Protozoan and fungal diseases in Solenopsis richteri, and S. quinquecuspis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Buenos Aires Province, Argentina
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1995;78(3):531-537
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; colony distribution; population density; diversity; abundance; symbiont; myrmecophile; disease; Protozoa; Microsporidia; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; fungi; Deuteromycotina; Hypomycetes; Myrmecomyces annellisae; endoparasitic fungus; biocontrol; 
AB  - The diversity and abundance of protozoa and fungi infecting colonies of  the fire ants Solenopsis richteri Forel and S. quinquecuspis Forel were surveyed in Buenos Aires province, Argentina. A total of 185 roadside sites was selected, and  1,836 colonies were sampled and examined under phase-contrast microscopy.   Pathogens were found at 32% of the sites and in 10% of the colonies. The microsporidium Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen & Hazard was the most common microorganism; it was present at 25% of the sites and 8% of the colonies. In some sites within  the surveyed region, the percentage of infected colonies with T. solenopsae ranged from 40 to 80%.  Other pathogens present were the microsporidium Vairimorpha invictae Jouvenaz & Ellis and the fungus Myrmecomyces annellisae Jouvenaz & Kimbrough. A field site was selected for future ecological studies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. A. Briano, L. A. Calcaterra, D. P. Wojcik, D. F. Williams, W. A. Banks and B. S. Patterson
TI  - Abundance of the parasitic ant Solenopsis daguerrei (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in South America, a potential candidate for the biological control of the red imported fire ants in the United States
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1997;26(5):1143-1148
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Solenopsis daguerrei; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis megergates; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Paraguay; Uruguay; scientific; colony density; season; distribution; population density; symbiont; myrmecophile; social parasite; Hymenoptera; biocontrol; 
AB  - Abundance of the workerless parasitic ant Solenopsis daguerrei (Santschi) in fire ant populations was surveyed in southern and southwestern Brazil, eastern, central, and northern Argentina, western and northern Uruguay, central Paraguay, and Bolivia from 1974 to 1996. A total of 12,180 fire ant colonies was sampled from 726 collecting sites for the presence of adult or queens, or both, of the parasitic ant. The presence of the parasite in fire ant colonies within the area surveyed was very low. In Argentina, S. daguerrei occurred in the provinces of Buenos Aires, Santa Fe, and Entre Rios, in 1.4-7.0% of the colonies. In Brazil, the areas of Dourados, Campo Grande, and Rochedo, Mato Grosso do Sul contained 1-6.2% of parasitized colonies. In Uruguay, < 1% of the colonies were parasitized. The parasite was not found in Paraguay and Bolivia. A new host (S. macdonaghi Santschi) is reported for S. daguerrei. The field with the highest presence of S. daguerrei (7%) was selected in Buenos Aires province for ecological studies. The low presence in its native areas should not discourage the potential use of this parasite as a biological control agent of imported fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - P. Calabi and S. D. Porter
TI  - Worker longevity in the fire ant Solenopsis invicta: ergonomic considerations of correlations between temperature, size and metabolic rates
SO  - J. Insect Physiol. 1989;35(8):643-649
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; biology; size; temperature; polymorphism; ergonomic; caste; longevity; metabolic potential; respiration; division of labor; physiology; rate of living; bioenergetics; 
AB  - We compared long-term economic costs of producing and maintaining different size fire ant workers (Solenopsis invicta) at two temperatures (24 and 30° C).  Energetic costs for three sizes of workers were calculated from their biomass, longevity, respiration rates, and the energy content of worker tissue.  Large workers lived considerably longer than small workers (50-140%, depending on temperature) and respired more slowly per mg of tissue (40%, independent of temperature). Overall, large workers cost about 30% less in cal/mo x mg than equal weights of small workers.  However, on an individual basis, large workers were still four times more expensive than small workers because of a 6-fold weight difference.  These data indicate that one large worker must provide services equivalent to at least four small workers, to justify the colony's energy investment.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. Calcaterra, S. Porter and J. Briano
TI  - Studies of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, infected with the Microsporidia Vairimorpha invictae and Thelohania solenopsae In Argentina.  [abstract]
SO  - Second International Symposium on Biological Control of Arthropods; September 12-16, 2005, Davos, Switzerland 2005;3:102
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; brood; colony; distribution; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Microsporidia; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; 
AB  - After their accidental introduction into the United States more than 80 years ago, the red and black imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren and Solenopsis richteri Forel (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) became aggressive pests for people, domestic animals, agriculture, and wildlife.  A classical biological control approach has been considered since the 1970´s and emphasized since 1988 with an intensive search of biological control agents in South America. The pathogens Vairimorpha invictae Jouvenaz and Ellis (Microsporidia: Burenellidae) and Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen and Hazard (Microsporidia: Thelohaniidae) are obligate intracellular microorganisms specific to fire ants. They were originally discovered in S. invicta in Mato Grosso, Brazil, and later found in other species of South American fire ants such as S. richteri, S. quinquecuspis Forel and S. macdonaghi Santschi. They are important components of the complex of natural enemies that attack fire ants in South America; however, their effect on red imported fire ant populations in their native land was never reported. Thus, the objective of this study was to document the long-term effects of both pathogens on field populations of the red imported fire ant. Fire ant populations and microsporidia prevalence were monitored 3-5 times per year for 4 years in eight field plots in northern Argentina. The mean population index per plot showed an overall reduction of 69%. The percentage of infection with V. invictae and T. solenopsae showed fluctuations that ranged from 29.2 to 1.4% and 13.6 to 2.6% respectively.  The highest infection rates were observed at the beginning of the study. A total of 394 colonies were sampled during the study, 325 (82.5%) were healthy and 69 (17.5%) were infected with microsporidia. The proportion of infected colonies with brood was 81% (56/69), similar to the proportion of healthy colonies with brood, 78% (255/325). The proportion of infected and healthy colonies in the population index categories was significantly different.  Of the infected colonies with brood, 49.3% was medium and 1.4% was large in size. In contrast, healthy colonies were larger, with 29.7 and 10.4% being medium and large, respectively. The general environmental conditions in the area of the plots were appropriate for fire ant population growth; consequently, they do not explain the overall reduction in the populations.  These results, combined with additional evidence reported previously, suggest that the infection with V. invictae and T. solenopsae has deleterious effect on native populations of S. invicta.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. A. Calcaterra, S. D. Porter and J. A. Briano
TI  - Distribution and abundance of fire ant decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae: Pseudacteon) in three regions of Southern South America
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 2005;98(1):85-95
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis electra; Solenopsis interrupta; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Bolivia; Paraguay; scientific; colony; nest; temperature; relative humidity; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon bulbosus; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon comatus; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon nr. disneyi; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon obtusus large form; Pseudacteon obtusus small form; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon; impact; ecological; biocontrol; host range; host specificity; sex ratio; species richness; species abundance; local assemblages; activity; 
AB  - The distribution and abundance of fire ant decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae: Pseudacteon Coquillett) were studied in three regions of southern South America, primarily from September 2002 to September 2004. A total of 2,421 flies belonging to 14 Pseudacteon species were found at 51% of the 662 fire ant mounds examined at 125 collecting sites. Flies occurred in a variety of habitats at altitudes from sea level to 2,280 m. Pseudacteon obtusus Borgmeier (large form) was found at the highest altitude and at the most western longitude. Flies were active between 16 and 37 degrees C, 20 and 90% RH, and 0 and 11.6 km/h wind speed. Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier showed the highest abundance and one of the broadest geographical distributions. Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, P. litoralis Borgmeier, the large form of P. obtusus, P. nudicornis Borgmeier, and P. nocens Borgmeier also were widely distributed. These species seem to be the most generalized within saevissima-group. Pseudacteon solenopsidis Schmitz was only collected attacking isolated workers. A new Pseudacteon species was discovered in northwestern Argentina. Seven fly species were reported for the first time on a new fire ant host in this region. Pseudacteon cultellatus Borgmeier was found for the first time on Solenopsis invicta Buren in Corrientes province in northeastern Argentina, where up to nine fly species have been found to co-occur. Males of P. tricuspis and P. obtusus were the only males normally attracted to disturbed fire ant colonies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - A. M. A. Callcott, S. D. Porter, R. D. Weeks, L. C. Graham, S. J. Johnson and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Fire ant decapitating fly cooperative release programs (1994-2008): Two Pseudacteon species, P. tricuspis and P. curvatus, rapidly expand across imported fire ant population in the southeastern United States
SO  - J. Insect Sci. 2011;11: 19:25 p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; Oklahoma; Puerto Rico; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; scientific; mounds; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; release; distribution; 
AB  - Natural enemies of the imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren, S. richteri Forel (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), and their hybrid, include a suite of more than 20 fire antdecapitating phorid flies from South America in the genus Pseudacteon. Over the past 12 years, many researchers and associates have cooperated in introducing several species as classical or self-sustaining biological control agents in the United States. As a result, two species of flies, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier and P. curvatus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae), are well established across large areas of the southeastern United States. Whereas many researchers have published local and state information about the establishment and spread of these flies, here distribution data from both published and unpublished sources has been compiled for the entire United States with the goal of presenting confirmed and probable distributions as of the fall of 2008. Documented rates of expansion were also used to predict the distribution of these flies three years later in the fall of 2011. In the fall of 2008, eleven years after the first successful release, we estimate that P. tricuspis covered about 50% of the fire ant quarantined area and that it will occur in almost 65% of the quarantine area by 2011. Complete coverage of the fire ant quarantined area will be delayed or limited by this species' slow rate of spread and frequent failure to establish in more northerly portions of the fire ant range and also, perhaps, by its preference for red imported fire ants (S. invicta). Eight years after the first successful release of P. curvatus, two biotypes of this species (one biotype occurring predominantly in the black and hybrid imported fire ants and the other occurring in red imported fire ants) covered almost 60% of the fire ant quarantined area. We estimate these two biotypes will cover almost 90% of the quarantine area by 2011 and 100% by 2012 or 2013. Strategic selection of several distributional gaps for future releases will accelerate complete coverage of quarantine areas. However, some gaps may be best used for the release of additional species of decapitating flies because establishment rates may be higher in areas without competing species.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. A. Carlson, W. A. Banks and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Distortion of mirex residues in insects owing to use of isopropyl alcohol as a collection solvent
SO  - Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 1973;9:365-369
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; pitfall; 
AB  - *[RIFA were used to show that mirex residues will move to uncontaminated insects when collected & stored in alcohol.  Weight loss of ants subjected to various regimes is given.]
AU  - C. E. Causton, C. R. Sevilla and S. D. Porter
TI  - Eradication of the little fire ant; Wasmannia auropunctata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), from Marchena Island, Galápagos: on the edge of success?
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2005;88(2):159-168
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Monomorium floricola; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; Myrmicinae; South America; Ecuador; Galapagos Islands; Marchena Island; scientific; colonies; colony budding; dry season; native biodiversity; chemical control; amdro; hydramethylnon; bait; bait dispersal; costs; monitoring; eradication; methods; linear transects; food baits; peanut butter baits stick; invasive species; 
AB  - The development of effective techniques to eradicate populations of invasive ant species is crucial to the conservation of native biodiversity. An intensive program was initiated in 2001 to eradicate the invasive little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata (Roger) from ~21 ha on Marchena Island in the Galápagos Archipelago. Linear transects, approximately 10 m apart, were cut through the vegetation of the infested area and a buffer zone of 6 ha. Amdro® (Hydramethylnon) was applied manually up to three times in the treatment area at three-month intervals between March and October 2001. To date, five follow-up monitoring surveys have placed sticks painted with peanut butter in a grid 3-4 m apart. Two small populations (0.1% of the area originally occupied by W. auropunctata) were detected in April and October 2002 and were subsequently treated with Amdro®. No W. auropunctata ants were found in May 2003 and April 2004. Five nocturnal surveys carried out in the immediate area of introduction of W. auropunctata did not detect any individuals. Monitoring surveys will continue for an additional two years to ensure eradication of any remaining populations and verify the success of this program. This paper discusses the procedures used to kill W. auropunctata and monitor the efficacy of the eradication methods, the program's costs, and its applicability to other island ecosystems.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. Chen and S. D. Porter
TI  - Biology of Pseudacteon decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae) that parasitize ants of the Solenopsis saevissima complex (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in South America
SO  - Insects 2020;11(2), 107:10 p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis electra; Solenopsis gayi; Solenopsis interrupta; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis saevissima complex; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; Chile; Paraguay; review; workers; biology; distribution; habitat; niche partitioning; season; behavior; mutualism; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon affinis; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon bulbosus; Pseudacteon comatus; Pseudacteon conicornis; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon dentiger; Pseudacteon disneyi; Pseudacteon fowleri; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusitus; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; Pseudacteon; koinobiontic; natural enemies; red imported fire ant; 
AB  - Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae) parasitize individual ant workers, causing decapitation of the host during pupariation. Phorid flies that attack South American fire ants in the Solenopsis saevissima (Smith) complex are distributed across a wide range of habitats and climates associated with the geographical range of their hosts. Sympatric species sharing the same hosts often partition niche resources by season, active time of day, host size, and/or different host activities. They have the potential of being used for biological control of the imported fire ants in North America, Australia, and Asia.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. J. Clair, R. Mulder, S. Porter, A. Bhatkar and S. B. Vinson
TI  - Survey of monogyne and polygyne fire ant colonies in Texas
1988;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; worker; queens; nest; monogyny; polygyny; colonies; mound counts; baits; 

AU  - L. R. Davis, Jr., R. K. Vander Meer and S. D. Porter
TI  - Red imported fire ants expand their range across the West Indies
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2001;84(4):735-736
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; Antigua; Bahama Islands; Abaco Island; Grand Bahama Island; Gorda Cay; British Virgin Islands; Guana Island; United States; Virgin Islands; St. Croix; Turks and Caicos Islands; Providenciales; South America; Trinidad; Caribbean; scientific; distribution; invasive species; spread; 
AB  - We present new records for Solenopsis invicta from the Bahama Islands (Abaco Island, Grand Bahama Island, and Gorda Cay) and the first records from the British Virgin Islands (Guana Island); the United States Virgin Islands (St. Croix, 2 sites); the Turks and Caicos Islands (Providenciales, 7 sites), Antigua (4 sites); and the island of Trinidad.  These records indicate that this potentially damaging species is becoming widely distributed across the West Indies.
AU  - T. Davis, P. M. Horton, D. F. Williams, H. L. Collins, D. H. Oi, B. M. Drees, C. H. Barr, S. B. Vinson, R. E. Gold, M. C. Merchant, N. Riggs, B. Hickman, P. Nester, D. Kostroun, B. Sparks, D. Pollet, D. Shanklin, K. Loftin, K. Vail, K. Flanders, P. Koehler, R. Wright, S. D. Porter, R. M. Periera, J. A. Briano and L. Mudge
TI  - Red Imported Fire Ant DoD IPM Training Manual
2003;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South Carolina; extension; biology; ecology; impact; agriculture; chemical control; biocontrol; 

AU  - H. A. Denmark and J. E. Porter
TI  - Regulation of importation of arthropods into and of their movement within Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1973;56:347-358
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; administrative; quarantine; 
AB  - A committee has been established to regulate the movement of arthropods into and within the State of Florida which is composed of: Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Plant Industry and Division of Animal Industry; Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services; University of Florida, Department of Entomology and Nematology; U. S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service; U. S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service Foreign Quarantine Program; and Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission. Among the organisms for which requests have been made (170 to date) are: insects, millipedes, mites, scorpions, spiders, ticks, snails, and protozoan malaria parasites. They were requested for a variety of studies, including insecticidal tests, biological control investigations with parasites and predators, genetic studies, and ant colonies, scorpions, and spiders for both scientific studies and as pets.
AU  - D. H. Epperson, C. R. Allen and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - The effect of red imported fire ants on Gopherus polyphemus at Camp Shelby, MS: Some preliminary results
1999;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Dorymyrmex bureni; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Mississippi; scientific; impact; ecological; wildlife; gopher tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; baits; 

AU  - D. M. Epperson, C. R. Allen and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Impacts of a non-native ant, Solenopsis invicta, on a keystone vertebrate, Gopherus polyphemus, and associated commensal fauna.  [abstract]
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Mississippi; scientific; impact; ecological; wildlife; gopher tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; baits; 
AB  - The gopher tortoise, Gopherus polyphemus, is a fossorial species native to the southeastern United States.  Tortoise numbers are decreasing throughout their range and red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) may be contributing to this decline.  In some habitats, as many as 50% of burrow aprons have S. invicta mounds present placing emerging hatchlings in close proximity to foraging S. invicta.  This study experimentally manipulates fire ant densities to determine the potential impacts of fire ants on hatchling survival.  Approximately 12 weeks prior to hatchling emergence, half of the study sites (n=10) were treated with Logic-7 to reduce fire ant densities.  S. invicta densities were significantly (P less-than .05) reduced at all treated sites.  After hatchling emergence, hatchlings (n=20) had radiotransmitters attached and were tracked daily until mortality.  All hatchlings were killed by predators before reaching one year of age.  Of these mortalities, 25% (n=5) were killed by S. invicta.  In all cases of S. invicta induced mortality, the hatchlings were either in untreated areas or had dispersed out of treated areas.  These data indicate that S. invicta are significant predators on tortoise hatchlings.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - B. R. Evans and J. E. Porter
TI  - The incidence, importance, and control of insects found in stored food and food-handling areas of ships
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1965;58(3):479-481
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Azteca; Camponotus; Dorymyrmex; Monomorium pharaonis; Neoponera; Paratrechina longicornis; Ponera; Pseudomyrmex; Solenopsis; Tapinoma; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; Louisiana; scientific; impact; urban; quarantine; chemical control; mechanical control; 
AB  - *[Inspection of 1193 ships in New Orleans & 235 ships in Miami has shown that a wide variety of insects infest the stored food & food-handling areas of ships.  Neoponera collected from ships in New Oleans; the rest collected from ships in Miami.]
AU  - C. J. Finlayson, A. V. Alyokhin and E. W. Porter
TI  - Interactions of native and non-native lady beetle species (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) with aphid-tending ants in laboratory arenas
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 2009;38(3):846-855
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Myrmica rubra; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Maine; scientific; mutualism; tending Hemiptera; Macrosiphum euphorbiae; predator-prey relationships; coccinellid; native; non-native; natural enemies; 
AB  - Interactions between lady beetles and the European fire ant (Myrmica rubra L.) tending potato aphids [Macrosiphum euphorbiae (Thomas)] were compared in the laboratory. Lady beetle species native to North America (Coccinella trifasciata perplexa Mulsant, Coleomegilla maculata lengi Timberlake, Hippodamia convergent Guérin-Méneville) and non-native species of Palearctic origin [Coccinella septempunctata L., Harmonia axyridis (Pallas), Hippodamia variegata (Goeze), Propylea quatuordecimpunctata L.)] were evaluated. Harmonia axyridis consumed a significantly greater number of aphids compared with all other species but C. septempunctata. Ant stings affected H. variegata and C. septempunctata to a greater extent than other species. Ants showed a significantly greater amount of aggression toward H. convergent and H. variegata compared with P. quatuordecimpunctata. P. quatuordecimpunctata, C. trifasciata, and H. axyridis reacted significantly less to ants compared with H. variegata, H. convergens, C. maculata, and C. septempunctata. Differences in interactions with natural enemies may explain, in part, the successful establishment of some non-native coccinellids in new habitats.
AU  - K. Flanders, L. C. Graham, S. Porter and D. Oi
TI  - Biological control of red imported fire ants
2005;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; 

AU  - K. Flanders, L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter and D. H. Oi
TI  - Biological control of imported fire ants
2008;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; 
AB  - Since 1998, the Alabama Fire Ant Management Program has been releasing natural enemies of imported fire ants.  These natural enemies are being studied to determine their impact on fire ants. It is hoped that eventually the overall number of fire ants in Alabama can be reduced through biological control methods. This publication provides information about fire ant parasitic flies (Pseudacteon spp.) and updated information about other biological control agents of fire ants that are being studied. Decapitating flies have now been released in sixteen Alabama counties and two species, Pseudacteon curvatus and Pseudacteon tricuspis, have established populations that are spreading throughout the state at a rate of 10 to 12 miles per year. Currently, populations cover one-half to two-thirds of Alabama.  Pseudacteon litoralis was released in Wilcox County in 2005 and is the first location in the US where three species of decapitating flies co-exist.  Thelohania solenopsae a pathogen of fire ants was released in Macon County, however it has not established.  Research on the biological control of fire ants is continuing with viruses and nematodes being recently discovered infecting this invasive pest.
AU  - K. Flanders, S. Porter and D. Oi
TI  - Biological control of red imported fire ants
1999;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; 

AU  - K. Flanders, S. Porter and D. Oi
TI  - Biological control of red imported fire ants
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; 

AU  - K. Flanders, S. Porter and D. Oi
TI  - Biological control of red imported fire ants
2003;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; 

AU  - P. J. Folgarait, O. Bruzzone, S. D. Porter, M. A. Pesquero and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Biogeography and macroecology of phorid flies that attack fire ants in south-eastern Brazil and Argentina
SO  - J. Biogeogr. 2005;32(2):353-367
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; ecology; distribution; Ropoport's rule; species diversity; species richness; climate; climatic factors; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon affinis; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon bulbosus; Pseudacteon comatus; Pseudacteon conicornis; Pseudacteon convexicauda; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon dentiger; Pseudacteon disneyi; Pseudacteon fowleri; Pseudacteon lenkoi; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; 
AB  - Aim: Saevissima group fire ants, Solenopsis richteri and S. invicta, have become serious pests when introduced from Argentina and Brazil to other continents. In South America, Solenopsis are distributed across a great variety of habitats and climates. In North America, S. invicta, introduced free of phorids, now ranges from coast to coast in the south. Success in introducing particular Pseudacteon as agents for the biological control of fire ants has varied across climatic zones.   We aimed at assembling all the information about fire ant phorids from Argentina and Brazil, to estimate their richness and geographical ranges, to perform a climatic analysis for these distributions, to define groups and climate-based communities, and to test and elucidate Rapoport's biogeographical rule.   Location Argentina and Brazil (South America).  Methods: From field and museum collections and historical records, we developed a  database of fire ant-specific phorids throughout their known geographical range. A total of 123 sites with values for 15 climatic variables were mapped between 10degrees and 38degrees SL and between 35degrees and 65degrees C WL for the presence/absence of phorids. We calculated species richness across all sites combined, and for each phytogeographical region, using rarefaction curves, and ICE and Mmean estimators. We calculated mid-latitudinal points, geographical ranges and areas for each species.  The correlation between mid-latitudinal point and ranges/areas was tested against a null model generated from the randomization of the raw distributional data. We used several types of multivariate analyses to distinguish groups of phorids by phytogeographical regions, hosts and climate, to find gradients of climate throughout the studied area, to define phorid communities in terms of their relationships with gradients of climate, and to test a mechanism for Rapoport's rule.  Results Richness estimations using ICE and Mmean estimators were similar or higher than the observed values depending on the phytogeographical region. Cluster multivariate analyses based on climatic, phytogeographic and host data revealed distinct groupings of Pseudacton. The 'cerrado' group was confined to tropical savanna areas. A more 'widespread' group included 'Chaco' and 'Maritime' subgroups defined by their respective association with extreme temperatures or precipitation. Ordination multivariate analyses showed (1) two climatic gradients throughout the study area: one of temperature and the other of precipitation, and (2) that climatic variables significantly explained the observed assemblages of phorids. Positive and negative signs of the eigenvalues from the main axes of a canonical correspondence analysis allowed us to define eight communities whose geographical distribution resembled that of phytogeographical regions. We found a significant and positive correlation between geographical areas and mid latitudinal points, and furthermore, the Mantel test based on climatic variables suggested a mechanism for Rapoport's rule applying in the case of Pseudacteon.  Main conclusions: Pseudacteon species with greater mid-latitudinal points occupy broader geographical areas and confront more stressful environmental conditions.  Because the composition of Pseudacteon communities is largely determined by climatic variables, the correspondence between climates at sites of origin vs. sites of release should be an important consideration in choosing specific phorids for biocontrol efforts.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - P. J. Folgarait, O. A. Bruzzone, S. D. Porter, M. A. Pesquero and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Geographic ranges and patterns of diversity for Pseudacteon flies, parasitoids of Solenopsis ants, from Argentina and Brazil.  [abstract]
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; worker; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; 
AB  - More than 40 species have been described within the cosmopolitan genus Pseudacteon, which specializes in attacking Solenopsis ants and is being considered to be used as a biological control tool in USA. Information on Pseudacteon records and distribution is currently dispersed and hardly published. However, this type of data is very important as a source of information on phorids localities for future captures and to infer phorids climatic tolerances to rear and release them at proper places in the States. Using bibliographic information, data from brazilian museums, and collections made by the authors, we compiled a data base on Pseudacteon throughout the distribution range of the two exotic fire ant pests, Solenopsis invicta (red) and Solenopsis richteri (black). The whole area included the region between 10-40ºS and 35-65ºW encompassing Argentina and Brazil. We used the grid method to estimate richness per cell and per phytogeographical regions and calculated equiprobabilistic curves following Rapoport (1982). We also estimated geographical ranges and climatic correlates for each species and classify them as broadly or narrowly distributed species. Equiprobabilistic curves were calculated for each cell using as central points of observations four cells that span a latitudinal gradient. These cells were: Goiania-Brasilia (GB), Belo Horizonte-Sao Paulo (BHSP), Corrientes (CO), and Capital-Buenos Aires (CBA); the first two in Brazil and the latter two in Argentina. There was no clear latitudinal pattern in species richness but phytogeographical regions in Brazil had greater diversity. However, the pattern of species that were lost from the centers of observations towards other cells changed consistently if the center was calculated at lower latitudes or at higher ones. This means that most of the species found at CO and CBA represented assemblages of species found in GB and BHSP, and represented species with broad geographic ranges and climatic tolerances. These data suggest that the introduction of broadly distributed Pseudacteon species will be more successful because these species have been able to spread across different climatic and phytogeographical regions and may have greater physiological tolerances to abiotic variables. In fact, broadly distributed Pseudacteon flies represent species that currently find red and black fire ants throughout their geographic range of distribution.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - E. A. Forys, C. R. Allen, D. M. Epperson and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Potential impacts from red imported fire ants on turtles.  [abstract]
1999;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; Mississippi; scientific; biology; impact; ecological; wildlife; turtle; gopher tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; 

AU  - E. A. Forys, C. R. Allen, D. M. Epperson and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Potential impacts from red imported fire ants on turtles.  [abstract]
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; Mississippi; scientific; biology; impact; ecological; wildlife; turtle; gopher tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; 

AU  - E. A. Forys, C. R. Allen and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Influence of the proximity and amount of human development and roads on the occurrence of the red imported fire ant in the lower Florida Keys
SO  - Biol. Conser. 2002;108:27-33
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; distribution; endangered species; habitats; habitat destruction; foraging; invasion; chemical control; fragmentation; impact; ecological; wildlife; lower keys marsh rabbit; Sylvilagus palustris hefneri; Big Pine Key ringneck snake; invasive species; 
AB  - We examined the influence of both the proximity and extent of human developments and paved roads on the presence of the predatory, non-indigenous, red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta). This species was inadvertently introduced into the United States at the port of Mobile, Alabama, around 1930 and rapidly spread to many southeastern states, including Florida. More recently, S. invicta colonized the Florida Keys, an area with a high proportion of rare and endemic vertebrate and invertebrate species. We placed bait transects in transitional salt-marsh, pineland, and hardwood hammocks on 13 of the lower Florida Keys and compared habitat type, the shortest distance of the bait transect to a development or road, and area of development and roads 50, 70, 100, and 150 m around each bait transect for areas with and without red imported fire ants. Red imported fire ants were detected on 21 of the 80 transects and were equally abundant in all habitat types. While all of the development and road variables differed significantly between bait transects with and without red imported fire ants, transects that were closest to roads and that had the largest amount of development within a 150 m radii had the highest probability of presence of red imported fire ants. Recovery efforts for endangered species in areas invaded by red imported fire ants should include analyses of the cumulative impacts of roads and developments in areas near protected lands.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - E. A. Forys, A. Quistorff, C. R. Allen and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - The likely cause of extinction of the tree snail Orthalicus reses reses (Say)
SO  - J. Mollus. Stud. 2001;67(3):369-376
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; foraging; invasion; endangered species; habitats; habitat destruction; chemical control; hydramethylnon; baits; efficacy; population density; invasive species; impact; ecological; Papilio aristodemus ponceanus; habitat loss; 
AB  - The Stock Island tree snail, Orthalicus reses reses, went extinct in its native range in the Florida Keys in 1992. Fortunately, O. r. reses has been introduced elsewhere and further reintroductions are currently planned. Before these reintroductions are implemented, it is important to try and determine which factors were most likely to have caused the decline and extinction. While habitat destruction was prob-ably the ultimate reason why there were so few tree snails, it is likely that an interaction of habitat frag-mentation and the invasion of an exotic predator caused the final decline that lead to the extinction in 1992. We examined the last 93 O. r. reses shells to infer cause of death. In addition, using surrogate Florida tree snails, Liguus fasciatus, we conducted experiments on two previously unstudied causes of mortality: predation by red imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta, and mortality from falls caused by wind.  We found that the majority of the last O. r. reses shells were intact, indicating that mammalian and bird predation were not the greatest causes of mortality. Mortality caused by wind knocking tree snails onto the rocky hammock substrate appeared to be a potential source of mortality, but few of the tree snails exhibited signs of breakage. Mortality from fire ants appears to be one of the most likely causes of the recent decline and extinction of O. r. reses. Experiments indicated that in a semi-natural enclosure, fire ants were capable of killing all ages of L. fasciatus, even during aestivation. Fire ants are currently found throughout the last known habitat of O. r. reses and were first discovered in this area at the time of the decline.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - H. G. Fowler, S. Campiolo, M. A. Pesquero and S. D. Porter
TI  - Notes on a southern record for Solenopsis geminata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Iheringia Ser. Zool. 1995;79:173
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; Minas Gerais; scientific; distribution; nest; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; 
AB  - *[This note reports the southern most record for S. geminata in Brazil, at Viçosa.   It is sympatric in this urban area with S. saevissima.  P. curvatus, a parasite of S. saevissima, was seen to hover over S. geminata but no attacks were observed.]
AU  - H. G. Fowler, M. A. Pesquero, S. Campiolo and S. D. Porter
TI  - Seasonal activity of species of Pseudacteon (Diptera: Phoridae) parasitoids of fire ants (Solenopsis saevissima) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Brazil
SO  - Cientifica 1995;23(2):367-371
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; season; behavior; activity; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon aduncus; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; 
AB  - The seasonal activity of the complex of species of the parasitoid phorid taxa Pseudacteon attacking colonies of the fire ant Solenopsis saevissima is documented.  The seasonally most constant as well as the most abundant species were P. tricuspsis and P. litoralis, with the remaining species (P. obtusus, P. pradei, P. aduncus [not aduncus, probably P. borgmeieri] and P wasmanni) being  much less abundant and consequently less seasonally constant.  Because of the broad seasonaliy exhibited by the complex of these phorid parasites, their colonization success in areas of introducted populations of the fire ants for biological control should not be limited by seasonal effects.
AU  - H. G. Fowler, M. A. Pesquero, S. Campiolo, A. Zacaro and S. D. Porter
TI  - Formiga perde a cabeça por causa de mosca
SO  - Ciencia Hoje 1996;21(122):63-64
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; popular; behavior; foraging; activity; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; biocontrol; 

AU  - J. Gavilanez-Slone and S. D. Porter
TI  - Colony growth of two species of Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) reared with crickets and beef liver
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2013;96(4):1482-1488
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Camponotus ﬂoridanus; Monomorium ﬂoricola; Monomorium pharaonis; Nylanderia fulva; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; artificial diets; development; mass rearing; beef liver; Acheta domesticus; Gryllodes sigillatus; 
AB  - Most diets for rearing fire ants and other ants contain insects such as crickets or mealworms. Unfortunately, insect diets are expensive, especially for large rearing operations, and are not always easily available or uniformly effective. This study was designed to examine colony growth of Solenopsis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) fire ants fed beef liver. Five experiments were performed: four with Solenopsis invicta Buren colonies and one with Solenopsis geminata (F.) colonies. In these experiments, we compared the net growth of colonies fed raw liver, boiled liver-agar, and/or raw liver-agar all with house crickets (Acheta domesticus, (L.); Orthoptera: Gryllidae) as a standard diet. Both liver and house cricket diets produced healthy growing colonies at the end of 6-8 wk. However, colonies fed crickets were 1.7 to 3 times larger than those fed with liver. Raw liver and raw liver-agar diets performed similarly. Boiling the liver significantly reduced colony growth in S. geminata, but liver boiled for as long as 45 min still produced healthy fire ant colonies. This study demonstrates that beef liver is an acceptable diet for rearing laboratory colonies of both S. invicta and S. geminata for periods up to 6 months when maximum growth rates are not needed. However, house crickets are recommended for research studies where maximal growth is important because liver, mealworms, and banded crickets (Gryllodes sigillatus, F. Walker; Orthoptera: Gryllidae) are not as effective. Poor survival of liver-fed colonies after 8 months may indicate that beef liver is not an acceptable long-term diet. Pilot tests with canned liver cat food and a dry dog food showed they were palatable but not suitable for brood production in fire ant colonies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. Gavilanez-Slone and S. D. Porter
TI  - Laboratory fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) fail to grow with Bhatkar diet and three other artificial diets
SO  - Insect. Soc. 2014;61(3):281-287
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South Carolina; scientific; rearing; Orthoptera; colonies; artificial diets; meridic diet; oligidic diet; holidic diet; mass rearing; insect culture; carpenter ants; fire ants; rearing; sugars; 
AB  - Various artificial diets have been used for rearing imported fire ants; however most of these diets include insect supplements. This study was designed to examine growth of red imported fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta Buren) on four artificial diets: a chemically undefined "oligidic" predator diet, two partly defined "meridic" diets utilized by Bhatkar and Whitcomb (Florida Entomol. 53: 229-232, 1970) and Dussutour and Simpson (Insect. Soc. 55: 329-333, 2008) for Solenopsis fire ants and Rhytidoponera ants, respectively, and finally a completely chemically defined "holidic" diet utilized by Straka and Feldhaar (Insect. Soc. 54: 100-104, 2007a, Insect. Soc. 54: 202, 2007b Erratum) for carpenter ants. Crickets and sugar water were used as a standard diet. After 6 weeks, fire ant colonies fed crickets and sugar water were healthy and had grown considerably. In contrast, colonies fed the artificial diets showed little or no growth demonstrating that these diets are not suitable for rearing healthy fire ant colonies. Nevertheless, the holidic or entirely synthetic Straka diet may provide a suitable basis for further studies of fire ant dietary requirements because it resulted in modest production of all brood stages. We advise caution in using diets that mix sugar and protein into a single "all in one" diet because workers and brood have differing dietary requirements.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. E. Gilbert, C. Barr, A. A. Calixto, J. L. Cook, B. M. Drees, E. G. LeBrun, R. J. W. Patrock, R. Plowes, S. D. Porter and R. T. Puckett
TI  - Introducing phorid fly parasitoids of red imported fire ant workers from South America to Texas: Outcomes vary by region and by Pseudacteon species released
SO  - Southwest. Entomol. 2008;33(1):15-29
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; South America; Brazil; Argentina; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; climate; temperature; drought; distribution; behavior; foraging; attack behavior; oviposition; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; host specificity; biocontrol; field releases; release site; parasitoid establishment; rearing; host specificity; parasite strain; oviposition; impact; ecological; biocontrol; introduced species; invasive species; 
AB  - Since the first status report on Pseudacteon decapitating fly introductions to Texas there have been significant developments in release activities across a range of release sites by a variety of participants. Systematic and widespread monitoring of population expansion by established Pseudacteon populations has been ongoing.  Prior to 2002, establishment success by the widely released initial species, P. tricuspis, was poor.  Two factors, severe drought in 1996-2001, and host-size dependent sex ratio were proposed constraints on establishing this species.  In recent years however, these limitations have been lifted in some areas by periods of favorable weather, irrigation of release sites, and/or by use of a smaller Pseudacteon species, P. curvatus, not reliant on larger fire ant workers to produce females.  Beginning in 2002, the USDA-APHIS collaboration with USDA-ARS and Texas Cooperative Extension programs, began to supplement release sites in Texas beyond those initiated by the UT Austin phorid fly project.  In 2005, private citizens began to participate in the spread of Pseudacteon to new sites. As of fall 2006, P. tricuspis, expanding from releases conducted between 1999 and 2001, can be found in over more than 7 million acres of Central and Coastal Texas, while P. curvatus, with its later start, is only now beginning an expansion phase in some sites.  South Texas continues to present problems for Pseudacteon populations that have established more easily in mesic and moderate climates.  However, recently two prior 'failed' sites were revealed to be false negatives after the record rains of summer 2007. Starting in late 2006, the first releases of P. obtusus in North America have resulted in establishment, and releases of 3-5 additional species are underway.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - B. M. Glancey, J. C. Nickerson, D. Wojcik, J. Trager, W. A. Banks and C. Adams
TI  - The increasing incidence of the polygynous form of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1987;70(3):400-402
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polygyny; distribution; chemical control; 

AU  - B. M. Glancey, R. K. Vander Meer and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Polygyny in hybrid imported fire ants
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1989;72(4):632-636
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Mississippi; scientific; chemistry; venom; cuticular hydrocarbons; polygyny; genetics; behavior; clustering; 
AB  - The occurrence of polygyny in hybrid fire ants from Mississippi was initially indicated by the clustering behavior of the workers around queens. Polygyny was demonstrated by the rate of oviposition of isolated queens, and dissection of samples of queens for the presence of sperm in the spermatheca. The colonies were identified as S. invicta/S. richteri hybrids by gas chromatograph analyses of venom alkaloids and cuticular hydrocarbons.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - B. M. Glancey, D. P. Wojcik, C. H. Craig and J. A. Mitchell
TI  - Ants of Mobile County, AL, as monitored by bait transects
SO  - J. Georgia Entomol. Soc. 1976;11(3):191-197
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster texana; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus pennsylvanicus; Conomyrma; Crematogaster clara; Formica schaufussi dolosa; Iridomyrmex humilis; Linepithema humile; Monomorium minimum; Monomorium viridum peninsulatum; Paratrechina; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Tetramorium guineense; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; ecology; distribution; community; collecting; bait; 
AB  - A survey in Mobile County, AL, made along three north-south transects at 0.5-mile intervals) ca. 25 to 40 miles long showed that the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, was the dominant species. A total of 16 species of ant was collected including the once dominant species, the Argentine ant, Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr). The native North American fire ants, S. xyloni McCook, and S. germinata (F.) were not collected.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Pheidole sp. D = Pheidole moerens]
AU  - L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter and V. E. Bertagnolli
TI  - Phorid flies in Alabama: A tale of two species.  [abstract]
2003;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Arkansas; scientific; extension; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; 
AB  - Two species of phorid fly have been released at 11 sites in Alabama and have been recovered from nine of these sites. Pseudacteon tricuspis was released in South Alabama in populations of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, and Pseudacteon curvatus was released in North Alabama in hybrid fire ant populations (Solenopsis invicta x Solenopsis richteri).  Number of mounds per acre and mound size was recorded for all release sites and for control sites, if established. Data from the three oldest sites are presented. Mound numbers decreased at two release sites, but increased at the third. Further analysis and data collection are needed to determine the long term effect of phorid flies on Alabama fire ants.   (abstract provided by author)
AU  - L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter and V. E. Bertagnolli
TI  - Phorid flies in Alabama: a tale of two species
SO  - J. Agric. Urban Entomol. 2004(2003);20(3):165-171
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; invasive species; biocontrol; distribution; 
AB  - Two species of phorid fly have been released at 11 sites in Alabama and have been recovered from 9 sites. Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae) was released in South Alabama in populations of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), and Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier was released in North Alabama in hybrid fire ant populations (Solenopsis invicta x Solenopsis richteri Forel). The number of mounds per hectare and mound size was recorded for all release sites and for control sites, if established. Data from the three oldest sites are presented. Mound numbers decreased at two release sites, but increased at the third. Further analysis and data collection are needed to determine the longterm effect of phorid flies on Alabama fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter, V. E. Bertagnolli, H. D. Dorough and A. T. Kelley
TI  - Establishment of the phorid fly, Pseudacteon curvatus, in Alabama for biological control of imported fire ants
2002;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; release; 
AB  - In 2001, flies were found in May and July.  On Aug.16, several areas around the release site were sampled.  No flies were found to the south of the release site.  However, the phorids were found in mounds approximately 1.1 kilometers north of the release site.  This is the first successful establishment of Pseudacteon curvatus in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter, J. A. Briano, V. E. Bertagnolli-Heller and K. Ridley
TI  - Phorid Flies in Alabama: Pseudacteon litoralis added to the list
2008;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; invasive species; releases; 
AB  - Pseudacteon litoralis was released in Wilcox County in 2005, which is infested with Solenopsis invicta.  No P. litoralis were recovered in the field in 2005. In 2006, one P. litoralis female was collected in the area of the farm where the release occurred in five collecting trips.  Three collecting trips were made on 21 May, 28 June, and 9 Aug in 2007.  On the first trips, no flies were collected.  However on the last trip, seven P. litoralis females were collected in the area.  The flies had moved from the original release area and were beginning to spread from the release site.  Pseudacteon litoralis are active for a few hours after sunrise and a few hours just before sunset.  The release site is a 2.5 hour drive from our lab, so we are not able to collect as often as we would like to document the spread of P. litoralis.  We plan to use sticky traps to monitor movement in 2008 in addition to collection at mounds.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter, J. A. Briano, K. Ridley and V. Bertagnolli
TI  - Pseudacteon litoralis in Alabama: established but hard to find.  [poster presentation]
2010(2009);MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; colonies; symbiont; myrmecophile; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; invasive species; 

AU  - L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter, K. L. Flanders, A. T. Kelley, H. D. Dorough and R. G. Hudson
TI  - Introduction of phorid flies for biological control of fire ants in Alabama.  [abstract]
2001;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; 

AU  - L. C. Graham, S. D. Porter, R. M. Pereira, H. D. Dorough and A. T. Kelley
TI  - Field releases of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) for control of imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Alabama, Florida, and Tennessee
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2003;86(3):334-339
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Tennessee; scientific; distribution; mound; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biocontrol; parasitoid establishment; 
AB  - The little decapitating fly, Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier, was released at 11 sites in Alabama, Florida, and Tennessee as a potential self-sustaining biocontrol agent of imported fire ants. We used a biotype from Buenos Aires Province, Argentina that parasitizes black fire ants (Solenopsis richteri Forel). Generally, several thousand flies were released as larvae in parasitized ant workers over a 1-2 week period. Pseudacteon curvatus flies were successfully established on hybrid fire ants (Solenopsis invicta x Solenopsis richteri) at a site near Talladega, Alabama where they have persisted more than two years and expanded out 5-20 km from the original release site. Flies failed to establish in Florida and Tennessee although a few 1st-generation field-reared flies were recovered at four sites in Florida. This fly is only the second parasitoid species to be successfully released against imported fire ants or any other pest ant species. Possible reasons for failures at the other sites include insufficient vegetation cover, competition with another Pseudacteon species in Florida, severe winter kill of ants at a site in Tennessee, and the possibility that the biotype of P. curvatus released was not a viable parasitoid of red imported fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - K. J. Gray, C. Porter, P. M. Hawkey, S. G. Compton and J. P. Edwards
TI  - Roger's ant: a new pest in hospitals
SO  - Brit. Med. J. Clinical Res. 1995;311(6997):129
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Hypoponera punctatissima; Ponerinae; Europe; Great Britain; scientific; distribution; impact; medical; hospital; stings; bacteria; 
AB  - *[We report what we believe to be the first infestation of a hospital by Roger's ants, Hypoponera punctatissima. Winged ants were first sighted around the nurses' station in the cardiac intensive care unit in October 1994, & several staff members reported multiple stings from the ants.]
AU  - D. A. Hahn, A. R. Martin and S. D. Porter
TI  - Body size, but not cooling rate, affects supercooling points in the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 2008;37(5):1074-1080
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; workers; physiology; body size; allometry; cooling rate; supercooling points; cold tolerance; cold stress; temperature; thermoregulation; freezing; supercooling; correlation; thermodynamics; overwintering; winter hardiness; 
AB  - The level of an animal's stress resistance is set by multiple intrinsic physiological and extrinsic environmental parameters. Body size is a critical intrinsic parameter that affects numerous fitness-related organismal traits including fecundity, survival, mating success, and stress resistance. The rate of cooling is a critical extrinsic environmental factor that can affect thermal stress resistance. Workers of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), display considerable variation in adult body size. Therefore, developing ecologically realistic models of thermotolerance in this species requires a consideration of body size. We tested the hypothesis that body size and cooling rate would interact to set the supercooling point in fire ant workers by exposing workers of a range of body sizes to three different cooling regimens: a very fast ramp of -10°C/min, an intermediate ramp of -1°C/min, and an ecologically relevant slow ramp of -0.1°C/min. Specifically, we asked whether large workers were more susceptible to differences in cooling rate than smaller workers. We found that body size had a considerable effect on supercooling point with the largest workers freezing at a temperature -3°C higher than the smallest workers. Cooling rate had a very small effect on supercooling point, and there was no interaction between the two factors. Therefore, the allometry of supercooling points across the range of worker body sizes does not change with cooling rate.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. L. Haynes, D. P. Wojcik, J. C. Allen, R. Campbell, C. R. Carroll, T. H. Hsiao, J. Logan and R. Stinner
TI  - The theory of population dynamics
SO  - Proceedings of the Symposium on the Imported Fire Ant, June 7-10, 1982 Atlanta American Hotel, Atlanta, Georgia 1982:50-66
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; review; biology; physiology; genetics; ecology; behavior; biocontrol; 

AU  - D. C. Henne, S. J. Johnson and S. D. Porter
TI  - Dispersal of the decapitating fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, a biological control agent of the red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren in Southeast Louisiana.  [poster presentation]
2004;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Louisiana; scientific; mounds; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; release; invasive species; 
AB  - Establishment of Pseudacteon tricuspis has been confirmed at the following release locations in SE Louisiana: (1) -1 3 km north of Covington (St. Tammany Parish), (2) -8 km east of Norwood (East Feliciana Parish).  During September and October, dispersal of P. tricuspis was evaluated in four cardinal directions from the release point (N, S, E, and W), at increasing distances until no flies were observed.  At each evaluation site, 8-12 S. invicta mounds were disturbed and monitored for 30 minutes.  Pseudacteon tricuspis have dispersed almost 14.5 km from the Covington release site since fall 1999 and almost 10 km from the Nonvood release site since spring 2000.  Average number of flies observed per S. invicta mounds in fall 2003 were 0.69 flies/mound at the Covington release site and 1.04 flies/mound at the Nonvood release site.  The rate of dispersal at the Covington release site has not yet reached an asymptotic rate, implying that the rate of dispersal is increasing.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. C. Henne, S. J. Johnson and S. D. Porter
TI  - Status of the fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon tricuspis (Diptera: Phoridae) in Louisiana
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2007;90(3):565-569
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Louisiana; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Pseudacteon tricuspis; parasitoids; biocontrol agents; population distribution; distribution; methodology; parasitoid releases; release methods; parasitoid establishment; range expansion; invasive species; 
AB  - Eight releases of the South American fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, were conducted in Louisiana from 1999 to 2006. Although P. tricuspis was initially recaptured at 88% of the release sites, four of the releases ultimately failed, so long-term establishment was only 43%. Fly populations from two releases have expanded out 50-80 km from their release sites (Fall 2006).   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. M. Heraty, D. P. Wojcik and D. P. Jouvenaz
TI  - Species of Orasema parasitic on the Solenopsis saevissima-complex in South America (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae, Formicidae)
SO  - J. Hym. Res. 1993;2(1):169-182
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pheidole nitidula; Pheidole radoszkowskii; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Colombia; Ecuador; Guyana; Paraguay; Peru; Uruguay; scientific; biology; taxonomy; key; ecology; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Eucharomorpha paraguayensis; Orasema doellojuradoi; Orasema crassa; Orasema pireta; Orasema salebrosa; Orasema simplex; Orasema worcesteri; Orasema xanthopus; 
AB  - *[Life history of O. xanthropus is discussed.]     Orasema salebrosa Heraty & Orasema simplex Heraty are parasitoids of Solenopsis richteri Forel.  Orasema worcesteri (Girault) (referred to as O. doello-juradoi Gemignani) is a parasitoid of Pheidole radoszkowskii Mayr (referred to as P. nitidula Emery).  Orasema xanthopus (Cameron) is a parasitoid of Solenopsis invicta Buren.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - A. W. Hook and S. D. Porter
TI  - Destruction of harvester ant colonies by invading fire ants in South-central Texas (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Southwest. Nat. 1990;35(4):477-478
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex barbatus; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; prey; ecology; mounds; interspecific interactions; aggression; mortality; competitive replacement; 
AB  - At the Brackenridge Field Laboratory in Texas, USA, only 1 of 5 colonies of Pogonomyrmex barbatus attacked by invading colonies of the polygyne form of Solenopsis invicta survived.  Observations of antagonistic interactions between the 2 species of ants are described in detail.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - J. B. Hoy, S. D. Porter and P. G. Koehler
TI  - A microcomputer-based activity meter for multiple animals
SO  - J. Neurosci. Methods 1997;72:183-188
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; foraging activity; trail; recruitment; methods; video system; 
AB  - We describe and validate a computer-video system that records and displays in real-time the activity of multiple specimens in a user-defined space, at user-defined intervals.  The computer program uses image subtraction algorithms to record changes in video images, and stores observations in column format or as a series of 2-D matrices.  The program was tested under various lighting conditions, backgrounds, specimen size and specimen speed.  An AV model of Macintosh computer with video input from a camera or video cassette recorder was used to record and analyze the mechanical movement of spots on a turntable and  the locomotor activity of an ant colony.  The limitations and potential applications of the program are discussed.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. Hu, R. K. Vander Meer, S. D. Porter and L. Chen
TI  - Cuticular hydrocarbon profiles differentiate tropical fire ant populations (Solenopsis geminata, Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Chem. Biodivers. 2017;14(11), e1700192:8 p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; cuticular hydrocarbons; n‐alkanes; n‐alkenes; tricosane; tricosene; (Z)‐9‐tricosene; distribution; color forms; dark form; red form; GC/MS; 
AB  - The cuticular hydrocarbons (CHCs) from hexane rinses of workers from two Florida populations (dark and red forms) of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata, were separated by silica gel chromatography and identified by GC/MS analysis. Both the dark form and the red form produce similar CHCs with carbon chain lengths ranging from 17 to 35. However, the relative percentages of these CHCs were consistently different between the two color forms. The largest CHC component in the dark form is tricosane, and (Z)‐9‐tricosene for the red form. There were several significant differences in percent composition. For example, the dark form was characterized by a low tricosene:tricosane ratio (ca. 0.25), whereas this ratio was > 2.5 for the red form. The ratio of tricosene:tricosane can be used as a diagnostic biomarker to delimit the dark and red forms. Cluster analysis showed that the CHCs patterns of dark form colonies are completely separated from the CHC pattern of red form colonies. Differences in social behaviors like nestmate recognition and polygyny between workers from this dark form and the red form await further investigation.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - C. D. Jorgensen and S. D. Porter
TI  - Foraging behavior of Pogonomyrmex owyheei in Southeast Idaho
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1982;11(2):381-384
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; diet; distribution; territory; foraging; distance; success rate; transit speed; searching time; 
AB  - Foraging behavior of Pogonomyrmex owyheei Cole was studied from 1977 to 1979 in Raft River Valley, Idaho.  Average foraging distances were positively correlated with the estimated number of foragers per colony.  Foraging trips took an average of 11.3 min, with 64% of this time spent in transit and 36% searching.  Of the foragers, 75% returned with food, 21% with rock or debris, and 4% without a payload.  Foraging ranges of individual colonies seldom overlapped, and aggressive encounters between ants of neighboring colonies were not observed.  Concepts of territoriality may be unnecessary to explain space and resource partitioning among adjacent colonies of P. owyheei.   (abstract provided by author)
AU  - D. P. Jouvenaz, G. E. Allen, W. A. Banks and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - A survey for pathogens of fire ants, Solenopsis spp., in the Southeastern United States
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1977;60(4):275-279
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; South Carolina; scientific; pathogen; microsporidium; Protozoa; Microsporida; neogregarine; Sporozoa; Neogregarinida; yeasts; biocontrol; 
AB  - In a survey conducted in the Southeastern United States, one colony in a sample of 1,007 colonies of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, was infected with a microsporidium (Protozoa: Microsporida). The normal host of this parasite appears to be the tropical fire ant, S. geminata (F.).  A benign or very mildly pathogenic yeast was associated with 93 (9.24%) of the S. invicta colonies, and was most common in areas which have been infested with this ant for the longest periods.  No pathogens were associated with 83 colonies of the black imported fire ant, Solenopsis richteri Forel. The apparent rarity of bona fide pathogens in imported fire ants in the United States is in marked contrast to the abundance of pathogens in these and other Solenopsis spp. in South America.  Four species of microsporidia (possibly new genera) were detected in 22 (7.2%), 12 (3.9%), 6 (2.0%), and 4 (1.3%) of 307 colonies of the tropical fire ant, S. geminata. One colony of this species was infected by a neogregarine (Sporozoa: Neogregarinida). No pathogens were found in a small sample (53 colonies) of the Southern fire ant, S. xyloni McCook.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Jouvenaz, R. K. Vander Meer and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Chemical mimicry in a parasitoid, Orasema spp., (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae) of fire ants. [Abstract]
1988;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; chemistry; cuticular hydrocarbons; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; biocontrol; 

AU  - D. P. Jouvenaz and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Parasitic nematode observed in the fire ant, Solenopsis richteri, in Argentina
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1990;73(4):674-675
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; nematode; mermithid nematode; biocontrol; disease transmission; 
AB  - During a survey for natural enemies of Solenopsis in Argentina in 1987, colonies of S. richteri were found to be infected by nematodes different from those previously observed.  In each colony, fewer than 1% of workers were parasitized by one large (about 15 mm) nematode per host. The parasite appeared to be a larval mermithid and therefore unidentifiable to genus.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Jouvenaz, D. P. Wojcik, M. A. Naves and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - Observations on a parasitic nematode (Tetradonematidae) of fire ants, Solenopsis (Formicidae), from Mato Grosso
SO  - Pesq. Agropec. Brasil. 1988;23:525-528
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; caste; mound; colony; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Mermithoidea; Tetradonematidae; Tetradonema; biocontrol; disease transmission; 
AB  - Parasitic nematodes, Tetradonerma sp. (Mermithoidea: Tetradonematidae) were observed in the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, for the first time. Five colonies in a sample of 14 colonies from one site in Mato Grosso were infected. The infection rate among adult workers was 12.5% in one colony and less than 5% in each of the remaining colonies. Adult reproductive males and females, eggs, and juvenile nematodes were observed in the haemocoel of male and worker ants. The infected worker ants often can be recognized by their slightly enlarged gasters, the dorsal sclerites of which may have a scalloped appearance. There are no other morphological signs of infection and no observable changes in behavior. Infected adult males contained normal sperm. An attempt to transmit the nematode to colonies of S. invicta in the United States was unsuccessful.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Jouvenaz, D. P. Wojcik and R. K. Vander Meer
TI  - First observation of polygyny in fire ants, Solenopsis spp., in South America
SO  - Psyche 1989;96(3-4):161-165
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; queens; physogastric queen; polygyny; colonies; 
AB  - A total of 16 polygynous colonies from eight sites in Buenos Aires Province were among 295 colonies of fire ants from 33 sites in Buenos Aires and Santa Fe provinces which we separated from the soil and examined for pathogens and symbiotic arthropods.  Twelve of these were identified as S. richteri chromatotype I (Vander Meer, unpublished), and the remaining four as Solenopsis quinquecuspis Forel.  The 16 polygynous colonies yielded a total of 116 inseminated queens.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. R. King and S. D. Porter
TI  - Recommendations on the use of alcohols for preservation of ant specimens (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Insect. Soc. 2004;51(2):1-6
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Camponotus floridanus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; methods; ethanol; isopropanol; preservatives; isopropyl alcohol; chemical concentration; storage time; insect preservation; specimen preservation; chemical preservation; preservation methods; DNA extraction; DNA; 
AB  - Collectors use a variety of concentrations and types of alcohols to preserve ant specimens.  We evaluated existing literature, experimental evidence, and expert myrmecological advice to determine what kind and concentration of alcohols will result in the best preserved specimens for card-point mounting and DNA extraction.  For our experimental evaluation, we killed and stored Solenopsis invicta, Camponotus floridanus, and Dorymyrmex bureni workers in isopropanol and ethanol at four concentrations (70, 85, 95, 100%) over three time periods (24 h, 1 month, 6 months).  We then compared specimen condition and amenability to manipulation for mounting on card points.  Specimens stored in either 95% isopropanol or 95% ethanol for time periods longer than 24 hours produced the best specimens for mounting.  A literature review revealed that DNA is best preserved in 95 - 100% ethanol due to the ability of ethanol to more rapidly penetrate cellular membranes and deactivate DNase activity than other primary alcohols.  We recommend that general collections of adult ant specimens should be killed and stored in 95% ethanol.  Following this recommendation will result in ant specimens that are easier to mount for museum collections and better preserved for molecular studies.  A variety of other killing and preservation techniques relevant to the study of ants are also discussed.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. R. King and S. D. Porter
TI  - Evaluation of sampling methods and species richness estimators for ants in upland ecosystems in Florida
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 2005;34(6):1566-1578
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; ecology; rarefaction; species occurrences; species richness; species richness estimation; structured inventory; sampling; pitfall traps; baits; leaf litter extraction; Berlese funnels; hand collecting; 
AB  - The growing emphasis on including invertebrates in global biodiversity conservation efforts has prompted an increase in the study of invertebrate assemblages. Invertebrate sampling designs and the bias of individual methods, nevertheless, remain poorly understood for a variety of habitats. We used a structured inventory approach to sampling ants in five upland ecosystems in Florida. We evaluated the efficiency of quantitative and nonquantitative methods for sampling ants. We also evaluated the performance of four species richness estimators. A total of 3,774 species occurrences were distributed among 1,732 samples that contained 94 species from 31 genera. Twenty unique species and 10 duplicate species were collected. Compared with a comprehensive species list for Florida, sampling captured approximately equal to 66% of the regional fauna and approximately equal to 70-90% of species within the ecosystems studied. Combinations of sampling methods were much more effective for assessing species richness. Individual methods were complementary and sampled only part of the entire assemblage. Nonparametric estimators (an incidence-based coverage estimator [ICE] and a jackknife estimator [Jack2]) performed better than lognormal fitting, and Michaelis-Menten curve extrapolation. However, none of the estimators was stable, and their estimates should be viewed with skepticism. The results of this study provide support for the use of the Ants of the Leaf Litter (ALL) protocol for thoroughly sampling ant assemblages in temperate and subtropical ecosystems. Furthermore, our results indicate that even in relatively species-poor (compared with the tropics) temperate and subtropical regions, a large sampling effort that includes multiple sampling methods is the most effective manner of thoroughly sampling an ant assemblage. Therefore, we suggest that structured inventory should be adopted for a wider variety of terrestrial invertebrate studies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. R. King and S. D. Porter
TI  - Body size, colony size, abundance, and ecological impact of exotic ants in Florida's upland ecosystems
SO  - Evol. Ecol. Res. 2007;9(5):757-774
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Amblyopone pallipes; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Aphaenogaster flemingi; Aphaenogaster floridana; Aphaenogaster lamellidens; Aphaenogaster treatae; Brachymyrmex depilis; Brachymyrmex nr. obscurior; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus castaneus; Camponotus discolor; Camponotus floridanus; Camponotus impressus; Camponotus nearcticus; Camponotus socius; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; Cardiocondyla wroughtonii; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Crematogaster atkinsoni; Crematogaster lineolata; Crematogaster minutissima; Cyphomyrmex minutus; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bossutus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Dorymyrmex elegans; Dorymyrmex grandulus; Dorymyrmex reginicula; Eurhopalothrix floridanus; Forelius pruinosus; Forelius; Formica archboldi; Formica pallidefulva; Formica schaufussi dolosa; Hypoponera inexorata; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypoponera opacior; Monomorium viride; Myrmecina americana; Neivamyrmex carolinensis; Neivamyrmex opacithorax; Neivamyrmex texanus; Odontomachus brunneus; Odontomachus relictus; Odontomachus ruginodus; Paratrechina arenivaga; Paratrechina concinna; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina parvula; Paratrechina phantasma; Paratrechina wojciki; Pheidole adrianoi; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole dentigula; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Platythyrea punctata; Pogonomyrmex badius; Ponera exotica; Proceratium pergandei; Pseudomyrmex ejectus, Pseudomyrmex elongatus, Pseudomyrmex gracilis, Pseudomyrmex pallidus; Pyramica bunki; Pyramica clypeata; Pyramica creightoni; Pyramica deyrupi; Pyramica dietrichi; Pyramica eggersi; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis globularia; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis nickersoni; Solenopsis pergandei; Solenopsis picta; Solenopsis nr. abdita; Solenopsis nr. carolinensis; Solenopsis tennesseensis; Solenopsis tonsa; Strumigenys emmae; Strumigenys louisianae; Strumigenys rogeri; Temnothorax bradleyi; Temnothorax palustris; Temnothorax pergandei; Temnothorax texanus; Tetramorium simillimum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Wasmannia auropunctata; Xenomyrmex floridanus; Amblyoponinae; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Proceratinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; worker; worker size; body size; colonies; colony size; species diversity; population size; abundance; impact; ecological; upland ecosystems; disturbed ecosystems; environmental impact; ecosystems; biological invasion; invasive species; introduced species; native ants; 
AB  - With hundreds of species established in new localities around the world, ants are an important, widely distributed, and growing group of exotic animals. The success of many established exotic ants is hypothesized to be related to competitive advantages associated with smaller workers and larger colonies relative to co-occurring native species. To evaluate this hypothesis, ant assemblages were thoroughly sampled across the range of upland ecosystems in north-central Florida, a region with one of the most diverse exotic ant faunae in the world. Patterns of species richness, abundance, worker body size, and colony size were compared among species and ecosystems. We found that exotic ants were neither abundant nor diverse in any of the undisturbed upland ecosystems. In disturbed field sites, exotic ants accounted for about 40% of total ant abundance and 25% of species richness. A total of 94 species, including 13 exotic species and 9 endemic species, were captured. The average body size of exotic ants was not obviously different from related native species. The average colony size of exotic ants was smaller than native species, with the exception of Solenopsis invicta which had the largest colony size of all species. Introduced ants (including S. invicta) were neither speciose nor abundant in any of the native woodland ecosystems. Florida's intact, native upland ecosystems appear to be resistant to invasion of exotic ant species despite the fact that surrounding disturbed habitats host a large diversity and abundance of introduced species. The prediction that exotic species have smaller workers than related native species was not supported.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. L. Knapp and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). A pest of Florida citrus and its management
1992;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Brachymyrmex obscurior; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; Conomyrma bureni; Conomyrma medeis; Paratrechina bourbonica; Paratrechina faisonensis; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole morrisi; Pogonomyrmex badius; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; agricultural; citrus; chemical control; bait; 
AB  - Since the 1920's, ants have been reported as pests of nonbearing Florida citrus. Results from chemical control trials were negative due to a decline in ant populations in untreated areas following pesticide applications to treated plots and a wide variation in ants trapped between replicates of the same treatment.
AU  - A. Knutson, E. Bynum, D. Kerns, P. Porter, S. Biles and B. Reed
TI  - Managing insect and mite pests of Texas sorghum
2018;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; extension; workers; seed predation; impact; agricultural; sorghum; damages; chemical control; cultural control; 
AB  - *[Early seedbed preparation before planting reduces pest damage.  Recommended practices include planting healthy seed and preparation of the seedbed to promote rapid germination to reduce the damage by fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren & wireworms to planted seeds.]
AU  - M. Korzukhin, S. D. Porter and L. Thompson
TI  - Improved red imported fire ant models.  [abstract]
1997;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; scientific; behavior; colonies; distribution; mathematical models; soil temperature; worker; longevity; range expansion; invasive species; 
AB  - The objectives of this presentation are to introduce two versions of the red imported ant (Solenopsis invicta) [IFA] model developed by Korzukhin and Porter (1994). The purposes of our modeling efforts are to improve the understanding of IFA biology, ecology & control.  The first model is an improved version of the one published in 1994 that described nest founding, brood raiding, territory expansion, queen death, possible requeening and colony death. The improved model incorporates temperature dependent colony development, control strategies, and other modifications. Many adjustable parameters are included (Table 1). The new model uses weekly mean soil temperature at 10 cm (Table 2 shows worker longevity as a function of soil temperature), has a variable plot size (up to 1 hectare), and allows testing of discrete pesticide strategies (Table 3). Though improved, this updated model still has some of the limitations of the original, it models only monogyne colonies and an ideal, homogenous habitat. In the future, this model will be further adjusted to help with assessments of large-area management and biological control strategies. Figure 1 shows modeled IFA densities for the cities listed, using local soil temperatures. Note that the IFA is not expected to do well in some locales.  The second model is a single colony version developed to assess range expansion. Unlike several published models that tried to simulate this effect (Stoker et al. 1994, Killion and Grant. 1995), we tried to keep our model simple. Thus, we used a single colony system that modeled colony size as a function of: 1) worker mortality, 2) queen fecundity and 3) colony growth, with all parameters being modified by hourly soil temperature. Table 4 shows the adjustable model parameters. To assess the possible northern range of IFA we used 10 cm depth, daily max-min soil temperature data from 105 southern and western monitoring stations for the years 1973-1993 (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 1973-1993). Hourly temperatures were derived using a sine interpolation. We used the model to compare the capability of these monitoring stations to produce a colony that would replace itself (i.e., produce one new queen). Results of our model runs showed that colony survival was strongly dependent upon colony growth in the first few months of existence and that small variations in soil temp caused sharp changes in colony growth. When our model compared possible colony replacement against soil temperature, a "line" between the two isotherms shown in the distribution map in Vinson (1997) was produced. Additional modeling efforts will refine these results. Because altitude, aspect, slope, and vegetation cover have not been evaluated to see how these influence soil temperature, research will be conducted to assess these effects.  In the future, we will expand our temperature modeling by developing a temperature profile of northern Arkansas using new soil temperature data, air to soil temperature conversion models and our Geographic Information System. We will also try to improve our current singlecolony- mortality model and then integrate it with the temperature profile to develop an IFA riskrating system for Arkansas. The risk-rating system can aid IFA impact assessment, and assist planning and implementation of prevention andlor suppression strategies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - M. D. Korzukhin and S. D. Porter
TI  - Spatial model of territorial competition and population dynamics in the fire ant Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1994;23(4):912-922
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; queen; requeening; growth; death; distribution; intraspecific interactions; competition; territory; survivorship; territorial growth; brood raiding; colony founding; survival; queen death; 
AB  - We developed a simulation model of monogyne fire ant populations which operates by  competitive interactions of individual colony territories.  This model describes six major aspects of colony life history: nest founding, brood raiding, territory expansion, queen death, possible requeening, and colony death.  Individual colony territories are represented by rectangles, whose sides change independently depending upon the presence and size of neighboring colonies.  Growing colonies try to occupy free space, while retaining square territorial dimensions whenever possible.  The growth of fire ant populations in the model compared well with available field data.  The model predicted that competitive exclusion due caused by territorial interactions should occur when areas reach 70-90% territory coverage.  Several computer experiments were conducted with the model to examine the importance of colony growth rate, brood raiding activity and other parameters on the relative success of sequentially founding colony cohorts.  A one-week advantage in founding generally increased the long-term survival of young colonies by 40-80%.  We also examined the factors affecting average coverage of an area by colony territories.  Maximum coverage was achieved under a continuous influx of 50 queens/(ha-wk) or a single settlement of 1000 queens/ha; both values were much less than actual magnitudes of queen influx observed in the field.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.
AU  - M. D. Korzukhin, S. D. Porter and L. C. Thompson
TI  - Fire ant population dynamics computer model.  [abstract]
1993;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; 

AU  - M. D. Korzukhin, S. D. Porter, L. C. Thompson and S. Wiley
TI  - Modeling temperature-dependent range limits for the fire ant Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in the United States
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 2001;30(4):645-655
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Arizona; Arkansas; California; Delaware; Kansas; Kentucky; Maryland; Missouri; Nevada; New Jersey; New Mexico; Oklahoma; Oregon; Tennessee; Utah; Virginia; Washington; scientific; colony; reproduction; distribution; spread; soil temperature; air temperature; rain; dynamic model; prediction; alate production; range prediction; winter-kill; 
AB  - We predict the future range of the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren within the United States based on climate and its current extreme distributions. To reach that goal, a dynamic model of colony growth with two time steps per day was formulated that operates by colony area, S, and alate production, a. Colony growth rate depended on daily maximum and minimum soil temperatures.  Temperature records at 4,537 meteorological stations within the current (near 1.5 million km2) and potential range of S. invicta were obtained from NOAA's National Climatic Data Center. At each station, a colony was allowed to grow and lifetime female alate production was calculated. Estimated alate production was then examined at current extremes of the fire ant distribution at selected locations in Arkansas, Tennessee, and Oklahoma. Estimates from these locations were used to define four zones of colony proliferation success: certain, possible, undemonstrated, and improbable. An annual precipitation limit (510 mm) was selected to indicate regions where arid conditions may prohibit growth in areas without supplemental water sources. Results of the model predict that S. invicta will likely move 80-150 km north in Oklahoma and Arkansas. It will also likely continue expanding into portions of Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware in the east and New Mexico, Arizona, California, Oregon, Nevada, and maybe even Washington and Utah in the west.
AU  - C. A. Lanciani and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - A high density of Martinezia dutertrei Chalumeau (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) in fire ant foraging areas on a pond edge
SO  - Coleop. Bull. 1991;45(3):278-279
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; ecology; mound; population; habitat; symbiont; myrmecophile; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Martinezia dutertrei; 

AU  - Y. Y. Lu, S. D. Porter and L. Zeng
TI  - New traps for capturing Pseudacteon phorid flies, parasitoids of red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren.  [in Chinese, English abstract]
SO  - J. Environ. Entomol. 2011;33(1):90-94
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; Asia; China; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; methods; survelliance; trap; 
AB  - Three new types of traps for capturing the Pseudacteon phorid flies, parasitoids of red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren, in fields were designed after experiments and tests in this paper. The technical points of trap construction and set were presented. The traps were proved to be attractive and effective after they were evaluated in capturing Pseudacteon phorid flies in fields.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - W. P. MacKay, S. Porter, H. G. Fowler and S. B. Vinson
TI  - A distribução das formigas lava-pés (Solenopsis spp.) no Estado de Mato Grosso do Sul, Brasil (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Sociobiology 1994;24(3):307-317
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis pusillignis; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis substituta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; key; distribution; 
AB  - We studied the distributions of four species of fire ants, Solenopsis spp., in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.  This area is the possible homeland of Solenopsis invicta Buren, the imported fire ant of the United States.  S. invicta is the most common and widely distributed species in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul.  S. pusillignis Trager is uncommon and was collected at only nine localities.  S. saevissima (F. Smith) is not common and was collected at only two sites.  Finally S. substituta Santschi was rarely collected (four localities), but is widely distributed in Mato Grosso do Sul.  Fire ants are uncommon in the great Pantanal swamp of the state, and are much more common and widely distributed in dryer, disturbed sites.  Densities of fire ants are much lower in Mato Grosso do Sul than they are in the United States.  In addition they occur at fewer sites, have smaller mounds and constitute a smaller fraction of the local ant community in Brazil.  These data are consistent with they hypothesis that North American populations of fire ants have escaped natural biological controls.
AU  - W. P. MacKay, S. D. Porter, D. Gonzalez, A. Rodriguez, H. Armendedo, A. Rebeles and S. B. Vinson
TI  - A comparison of monogyne and polygyne populations of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), in Mexico
SO  - J. Kansas Entomol. Soc. 1991;63(4):611-615
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Atta mexicana; Camponotus; Conomyrma; Crematogaster; Forelius; Gnamptogenys tornata; Monomorium; Neivamyrmex; Odontomachus; Pachycondyla harpax; Pheidole; Pseudomyrmex ferrugineus; Pseudomyrmex gracilis; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis globularia; Solenopsis invicta; Tetramorium spinosus; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Ectatomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; Mexico; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; monogyny; polydomy; ecology; distribution; population; mound; nest; density; worker size; allometry; 
AB  - We compared monogyne (single queen per nest) and polygyne (multiple functional queens per nest) populations of the tropical fire ant in Mexico.  We collected up to 16 queens in nests of the polygyne population.  Workers from polygyne nests were considerably smaller and lighter in color than workers from monogyne nests.  Nest density was extremely high in the polygyne population (over 2500 occupied nests and over 6000 unoccupied nests per ha).  These differences are similar to those found in the monogyne and polygyne populations of the imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta in the United States.  (abstract provided by author)        *[Polygyny in S. invicta is spreading in Texas; personal observation.]
AU  - T. E. Macom and S. D. Porter
TI  - Food and energy requirements of laboratory fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1995;24(2):387-391
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; diet; polygyny; colony; growth; physiology; caloric intake; biomass; collection; growth; bioenergetics; 
AB  - This study was designed to determine how much food is needed to sustain colonies of the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren.  Thirty laboratory colonies were fed 1, 2, or 4 crickets per day.  Half were given access to unlimited sugar water.  Colony biomass, cricket collection, and sugar collection were monitored weekly until each colony stopped growing.  Caloric intake was strongly correlated with and directly proportional to colony biomass (live weight) over an 8-fold range (2-16 g).  Colonies needed ≈ 1.14 +- 0.29 (Standard deviation) Kcal of food per gram of colony per week to sustain themselves.  The presence of sugar decreased the amount of cricket biomass collected (dry weight) from 0.186 g/g of colony per week for colonies receiving crickets to 0.106 g/g of colony per week for colonies receiving both sugar water and crickets.  Colonies fed only crickets approximately doubled their final size with the doubling of cricket availability; whereas, colonies receiving both crickets and sugar increased to a lesser extent.  The laboratory food collection rates in this study suggest that a field population of fire ants with 90 mature mounds per hectare would require ≈ 21,000 Kcal or 16.0 kg of insects and sugar (combined wet weight) per week in the summer.  (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - T. E. Macom and S. D. Porter
TI  - Comparison of polygyne and monogyne red imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) population densities
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1996;89(4):535-543
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony size; polygyny; monogyny; physiology; respiration; metabolism; biomass; standing caloric energy; population; mound density; nest; 
AB  - Polygyne or multiple-queen colonies of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, are reported to be a substantially greater environmental and economic problem than monogyne or single-queen fire ants because of much higher population densities associated with polygyny.  This study compared population densities of polygyne and monogyne fire ants using measures of mound density, worker number, ant biomass, metabolic consumption and standing caloric energy of ant biomass.  We began the experiment by counting and measuring mounds at 14 polygyne and 14 monogyne sites located within a 35-km radius of Gainesville, Florida.  Average mound densities were 3.03times larger at polygyne sites than at monogyne sites (470 verses 155 mounds/ha).  To adjust for differences in mound size, 22 monogyne and 21 polygyne mounds of various sizes were excavated from 16 of the experimental sites.  Colony size and biomass were regressed on mound volume.  These regressions were then used to estimate colony size and colony biomass from the mound volumes measured at the 28 field sites.  The estimated colony sizes and colony biomasses at each site were summed and used to estimate field population densities.  Polygyne populations contained 1.94 times more workers per unit area (35 million versus 18 million workers/ha) and 1.86 times more biomass (27.7 versus 14.9 kg wet weight/ha) than monogyne populations.  Energy usage and standing energy of the ants per hectare were respectively 2.30 times and 1.90 times higher in polygyne populations.  Overall, This study indicates that polygyne population densities are about two times larger on average than monogyne population densities.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.
AU  - M. E. Merchant, M. M. Porter and A. P. Russell
TI  - Texas statewide phone survey on Fire ant impact and control measures used by consumers
2001;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; extension; impact; medical; sting; urban; chemical control; 
AB  - *[A statewide telephone survey of 1000 Texans conducted in February, 2000 included questions about IFA impact & control measures used by consumers.  Seventy-nine% (+-3%) of Texans reported that they or a family member have been stung at some time by fire ants.  Fifty-six%, of Texans treated for fire ants last year.  Of those attempting control, 51% (+-4.1%) reporting applying 4 or more treatments in the past year.  Only 24% of respondents used broadcast baits to control fire ants.  The most common method of control (65%) was application of an insecticide directly to a fire ant mound.  Only 17% of respondents felt that water pollution from the application of fire ant insecticides was a serious pollution problem in their community.  Most Texans (87%) remain unaware of the Texas Two-Step Method for fire ant control.  However 3% of respondents indicated they were very familiar with this control method.]
AU  - M. E. Merchant, S. A. Russell and R. Porter
TI  - Educating the public about fire ant control: a fire ant campaign in Dallas, Texas
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; impact; urban; chemical control; IPM program; 

AU  - L. W. Morrison, M. D. Korzukhin and S. D. Porter
TI  - Predicted range expansion of the invasive fire ant, Solenopsis invicta,in the eastern United States based on the VEMAP global warming scenario
SO  - Divers. Distrib. 2005;11(3):199-204
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Delaware; Florida; Georgia; Kansas; Kentucky; Louisiana; Maryland; Missouri; Mississippi; North Carolina; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; Virginia; scientific; colony; temperature; climate change; range expansion; invasive species; VEMAP global warming scenario; model; 
AB  - The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, is an invasive pest from South America that currently occupies much of the south-eastern USA. Global warming is likely to allow range expansion of many invasive species, including S. invicta. We used a dynamic, ecophysiological model of fire ant colony growth coupled with models simulating climate change to predict the potential range expansion of S. invicta in the eastern USA over the next century. The climate change scenario predicted by the Vegetation-Ecosystem Modelling and Analysis Project (VEMAP) was used in our analyses. Our predictions indicate that the habitable area for S. invicta may increase by c. 5% over the next 40-50 years (a northward expansion of 33 +- 35 km). As the pace of global warming is expected to quicken in the latter half of the century, however, the habitable area for S. invicta in 2100 is predicted to be > 21% greater than it currently is (a northward expansion of 133 +- 68 km). Because the black imported fire ant, S. richteri Forel, occupies higher latitudes than S. invicta, the overall area of the eastern USA infested with invasive Solenopsis species could be greater than that estimated here.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. W. Morrison and S. D. Porter
TI  - Positive association between densities of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, and generalized ant and arthropod diversity
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 2003;32(3):548-554
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster flemingi; Aphaenogaster floridana; Brachymyrmex cf. obscurior; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus floridanus; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; Cardiocondyla venustula; Cardiocondyla wroughtoni; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Crematogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Dorymyrmex smithi; Formica pallidefulva; Formica dolosa; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypoponera punctatissima; Odontomachus brunneus; Paratrechina; Pheidole crassicornis; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Pheidole tysoni; Prenolepis imparis; Pyramica eggersi; Pyramica membranifera; Solenopsis cf. abdita; Solenopsis cf. carolinensis; Solenopsis cf. pergandei; Solenopsis cf. picta; Solenopsis cf. tennesseensis; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; monogyny; nests; mound area; temperature; humidity; communities; species density; species diversity; species richness; species abundance; foraging activity; pitfall traps; 
AB  - The invasive ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, is a threat to native arthropod biodiversity. We compared areas with naturally varying densities of mostly monogyne S. invicta and examined the association of S. invicta density with three diversity variables: (1) the species richness of ants, (2) the species richness of non-ant arthropods, and (3) the abundance of non-S. invicta ants. Pitfall traps were used to quantify S. invicta density and the three diversity variables; measurement of mound areas provided a complementary measure of S. invicta density. We sampled 45 sites of similar habitat in north central Florida in both the spring and autumn of 2000. We used partial correlations to elucidate the association between S. invicta density and the three diversity variables, extracting the effects of temperature and humidity on foraging activity. Surprisingly, we found moderate positive correlations between S. invicta density and species richness of both ants and non-ant arthropods. Weaker, but usually positive, correlations were found between S. invicta density and the abundance of non-S. invicta ants. A total of 37 ant species, representing 16 genera, were found to coexist with S. invicta over the 45 sites. These results suggest that S. invicta densities as well as the diversities of other ants and arthropods are regulated by common factors (e.g., productivity). Many invaded communities may be more resistant to S. invicta than generally believed, or possess an unexpected resilience for recovery if S. invicta can be permanently suppressed.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. W. Morrison and S. D. Porter
TI  - Phorid flies as classical biological control agents of imported fire ants.  [abstract]
SO  - Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on Biological Control of Arthropods, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 14-18, 2002 2003:497
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; distribution; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; 
AB  - Phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are solitary parasitoids of ants. Development occurs inside the head capsule of the host worker, killing the ant in the process. Pseudacteon flies may also have relatively large indirect effects on colony-level foraging and interspecific competition, as the presence of a single phorid can modify the behavior of hundreds of workers. Two Solenopsis fire ant species from South America, Solenopsis invicta Buren and Solenopsis richteri Forel, are serious pests in their introduced range in the United States. The high population densities of these two exotic ants may be due in part to an escape from natural enemies. Pseudacteon phorid flies from South America are being evaluated as classical biological control agents of imported fire ants in North America. Laboratory studies of one Pseudacteon species, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, and its interactions with S. invicta, revealed that the presence of this phorid decreased food retrieval by as much as 50%. We have imported select Pseudacteon species from Brazil and Argentina to the United States for laboratory evaluation, and are currently mass-rearing and releasing two species, P. tricuspis and Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier at multiple sites in the southeastern United States. In northern Florida, we established the first field population of P. tricuspis in October 1997. This species now covers approximately 8,100 square kilometers in Florida, and is continuing to expand its range and increase in abundance. Longterm monitoring of sites with and without flies will elucidate the magnitude of the effect of these parasitoids on target fire ant and associated arthropod populations. Pseudacteon flies and other natural enemies will not eradicate imported fire ants in North America, but may reduce fire ant densities.
AU  - L. W. Morrison and S. D. Porter
TI  - Phenology and parasitism rates in introduced populations of Pseudacteon tricuspis, a parasitoid of Solenopsis invicta
SO  - BioControl 2005;50(1):127-141
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; monogyny; colonies; colony size; populations; mound; mound area; foraging; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; phenology; parasitism rates; introduced populations; population density; seasonal variation; seasonal abundance; parasitoid density; parasitoid abundance; sex ratio; introduced species; 
AB  - We documented patterns of seasonal abundance and rates of parasitism in introduced populations of Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, a phorid parasitoid of the red  imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren. Adult P. tricuspis populations were censused at monthly intervals for 1 year at three sites in northern Florida. Censuses were conducted by aspirating phorids attracted to disturbed S. invicta mounds. Pseudacteon tricuspis adults were present in every month at all sites, although abundances varied greatly among sites and over time. The highest densities of flies (up to 453 censused at 10 disturbed S. invicta mounds in 30 min) were observed in November, and changes in abundance over time were positively correlated among sites. Sex ratios were usually male biased. Parasitism rates were evaluated by collecting workers from field colonies and monitoring them in the laboratory for evidence of parasitism. Parasitism rates were very low - always less than 1%. The average parasitism rate per colony over 16 colonies and 2 years was 0.058%. No pupariation occurred within the first 8 days of collection, suggesting parasitism by P. tricuspis induced behavioral changes in parasitized workers that precluded such workers from our collections. If so, true field parasitism rates may be several times higher than measured here, yet still low in an absolute sense. These low parasitism rates can be reconciled with observed adult phorid densities by considering the large number of host ants present at the study sites.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. W. Morrison and S. D. Porter
TI  - Testing for population-level impacts of introduced Pseudacteon tricuspis flies, phorid parasitoids of Solenopsis invicta fire ants
SO  - Biol. Control 2005;33(1):9-19
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; season; seasonal variation; temporal variation; mounds; population; population dynamics; population density; population-level impacts; seasonal abundance; species abundance; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; parasitism; parasitism pressure; pest monitoring; sampling; mound counts; hot dog baits; pitfall traps; introduced species; 
AB  - Parasitoid phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are potential biocontrol agents of invasive Solenopsis fire ants in the US. One Pseudacteon species, P. tricuspis Borgmeier, has been released and is now established over a large region of north central Florida. We conducted a multi-year, large-scale field experiment to investigate potential population-level impacts on host Solenopsis invicta Buren fire ants and associated arthropods. We established and monitored 67 field sites over a 3.5 year period, documenting S. invicta density and activity by three complementary sampling methods: (1) mound counts and measurements, (2) attraction to baits, and (3) pitfall trap catches. P. tricuspis abundance was determined by censusing flies at disturbed S. invicta mounds. P. tricuspis populations increased in abundance over the first two years following colonization and then oscillated seasonally, reaching higher abundances in the fall than in the preceding spring. S. invicta populations varied greatly over time, and repeated-measures ANCOVA revealed no effect of phorid parasitism pressure on S. invicta density or activity. P. tricuspis likely has a relatively small effect on S. invicta populations, which may not be consistent over space and time and is difficult to document against the background of high variability in fire ant populations due to various environmental factors (i.e., rainfall, disturbance). P. tricuspis parasitism pressure (averaged over the course of the experiment) was positively associated with changes in S. invicta density. Additionally, P. tricuspis abundance was positively correlated with S. invicta density after P. tricuspis populations had been established for >1 year. Introduced phorid populations may require many years before a measurable impact is apparent. Alternatively, parasitism pressure of a single phorid species may not be a major factor regulating fire ant populations.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. W. Morrison and S. D. Porter
TI  - Post-release host-specificity testing of Pseudacteon tricuspis, a phorid parasitoid of Solenopsis invicta fire ants
SO  - BioControl 2006;51(2):195-205
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster nr. carolinensis; Aphaenogaster miamiana; Camponotus floridanus; Crematogaster minutissima; Crematogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Forelius pruinosus; Linepithema humile; Odontomachus brunneus; Pheidole dentata; Pogonomyrmex badius; Pseudomyrmex pallidus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; temperature; mound; mound densities; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; host specificity; host acceptance; biocontrol; nontarget organisms; 
AB  - Inherent in any biological control program is the risk of nontarget effects. Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, a parasitoid phorid fly, has been introduced to the United States from South America as a potential biocontrol agent of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren. We conducted tests of host specificity on introduced populations of P. tricuspis, which are attracted to alarm pheromones released by their hosts during events such as mound disturbances and interspecific interactions. We monitored disturbed mounds of S. invicta and its close congener, S. geminata (F.), during the expansion of P. tricuspis across north Florida and after populations had been established for approximately 3 years. We also tested host acceptance in established populations of P. tricuspis by offering trays containing S. invicta, S. geminata, and 14 additional ant species representing 12 different non-Solenopsis genera. Although P. tricuspis was commonly observed to hover over and attempt to oviposit on S. invicta, we never observed any parasitization attempts on any other ant species. As predicted by laboratory tests, released populations of P. tricuspis appear to be highly host specific and pose no obvious threat to nontarget species.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[In table 1, uses Myrmecinae instead of Myrmicinae.]
AU  - L. W. Morrison, S. D. Porter, E. Daniels and M. D. Korzukhin
TI  - Potential global range expansion of the invasive fire ant, Solenopsis invicta.  [poster paper]
2003;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; distribution; global range expansion; invasive species; 

AU  - L. W. Morrison, S. D. Porter, E. Daniels and M. D. Korzukhin
TI  - Potential global range expansion of the invasive fire ant, Solenopsis invicta
SO  - Biol. Invasions 2004;6(2):183-191
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; Africa; Asia; Australia; Oceania; New Zealand; Europe; North America; South America; scientific; colony alate production; temperature; distribution; global range expansion; invasion; modeling; invasive species; quarantine; 
AB  - The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, is an invasive pest that has become widespread in the southern United States and Caribbean after introduction from South America in the 1930s. This species, which has diverse detrimental impacts on recipient communities, was recently discovered in Australia and New Zealand and has the potential to colonize numerous other regions. We used a dynamic, ecophysiological model of colony growth to predict the potential global range expansion of this invasive species. Based on minimum and maximum daily temperatures, the model estimates colony alate production and predicts future geographic range limits. Because S. invicta populations are limited by arid conditions as well as cold temperatures, we superimposed precipitation data upon temperature-based predictions, to identify regions that do not receive enough rainfall to support this species across the landscape. Many areas around the globe, including large portions of Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and numerous island nations, are at risk for S. invicta infestation. Quarantine officials should be vigilant for any accidental introductions of this pest in susceptible regions. Costs of eradication increase dramatically as the area of infestation grows, and large infestations may be impossible to eradicate. Other South American Solenopsis fire ants (e.g., S. richteri Forel) may become invasive if the opportunity arises.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. W. Morrison, S. D. Porter and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Sex ratio variation as as function of host size in Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae), parasitoids of Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 1999;66(2):257-267
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; South America; Brazil; scientific; colony; head capsule; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; environmental sex determination; sex allocation; host size; 
AB  - Some Pseudacteon (Diptera: Phoridae) flies are parasitoids of Solenopsis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) ant workers in North and South America.  Laboratory studies of sex allocation revealed a pattern of sex ratio variation as a function of host size, with more females arising from larger hosts.  Environmental sex determination is a possible mechanism for the observed pattern, and examination of Pseudacteon life history reveals several traits assumed to be important in models predicting conditions under which environmental sex determination is favoured.  Sex allocation patterns of Pseudacteon are compared with theoretical predictions and empirical data from better-studied hymenopteran parasitoids that have hoplodiploid sex determination.  The pattern of sex ratio variation observed has importan implications for biocontrol efforts of imported Solenopsis fire ants by the introduction of Pseudacteon parasitoids.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)             *[Larger host produced larger flies, with more females emerging from larger hosts]
AU  - L. W. Morrison, S. D. Porter and L. A. Nogueira de Sá
TI  - Classical biological control of imported fire ants by parasitoid flies.  [abstract]
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Brazil; scientific; nest; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; quarantine; introduced species; 
AB  - Phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are solitary parasitoids of ants. Development occurs inside the head capsule of the host worker, killing the ant in the process. Pseudacteon flies may also have relatively large indirect effects on colony-level foraging and interspecific competition, as the presence of a single phorid can modify the behavior of hundreds of workers. Two Solenopsis fire ant species, S. invicta and , have been introduced into the United States from South America and are serious pests in their introduced range. The high population densities of these two exotic ants may be due in part to an escape from natural enemies. Pseudacteon phorid flies from South America have the potential to be used as classical biological control agents of imported fire ants in North America. Laboratory studies of one Pseudacteon species, P. tricuspis, and its interactions with S. invicta, revealed that the presence of this phorid decreased food retrieval by as much as 50%. The primary mechanism of this effect was a significant decrease in worker activity when phorids were present. The presence of phorids did not significantly affect interspecific interactions between S. invicta and its close congener, S. geminata. The overall effect of introduced Pseudacteon phorids on imported Solenopsis fire ants in the United States will be evaluated from field releases of the flies and monitoring of target ant and associated arthropod communities. We have exported select Pseudacteon species from the Brazilian Quarantine Laboratory at Embrapa Environment, Jaguariúna, São Paulo State, Brazil to the United States for laboratory evaluation and field release, as part of a cooperative program between Embrapa and the USDA-ARS. In northern Florida, we had established 5 field populations of Pseudacteon tricuspis by the end of 1999. One population has been in existence since October 1997. The introduced populations are increasing in abundance and expanding in size, with the largest population covering an area of almost 100 square kilometers. Adult P. tricuspis were found to be active in the release areas in every month of the year. Long term monitoring of release and control sites should elucidate the magnitude of the effect of these parasitoids on target fire ant and associated arthropod populations. Pseudacteon flies and other natural enemies will not eradicate imported fire ants in North America, but could reduce fire ant populations to lower densities.  (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. A. Nogueira de Sá and S. D. Porter
TI  - Decapitating flies (Phoridae: Diptera) collected in the Jaguariúna area for fire ant biocontrol in the USA.  [abstract]
1998;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon convexicauda; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; rearing; 

AU  - D. Oi, S. D. Porter and S. M. Valles
TI  - A review of the biological control of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Myrmecol. News 2015;21:101-116
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; microsporidium; Kneallhazia solenopsae; virus; Solenopsis invicta virus-3; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; 
AB  - The suppression of established invasive ants will likely require biological control by natural enemies. This approach is self-sustaining and can impact undetected or inaccessible populations that are a source of the continual presence and expansion of the invaders. There is an ongoing effort to introduce and distribute biological control agents against fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 and Solenopsis richteri Forel, 1909, in the USA. Eight natural enemies, consisting of two pathogens, a microsporidium, Kneallhazia solenopsae, and a virus, Solenopsis invicta virus-3, plus six species of parasitoid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are now established (i.e., reproducing in the field). These biological control agents are host specific and negatively impact fire ants to varying degrees. Fire ant populations in the presence of biological control agents are often reduced (based on number of ants per nest), but the number of nests may not decline. It remains to be seen if the continued release and establishment of a suite of biological control agents can result in the complete control of fire ants. The currently established biocontrol agents are acting as expected by weakening fire ant colonies, and contributing to the potential cumulative attrition of colony vigor. Knowledge gained from establishing and disseminating biological control agents of fire ants in the USA will allow for faster progress in the utilization of biological control for fire ants in other regions of the world as well as providing guidance for the importation and establishment of natural enemies for other invasive ants.  (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. Oi, S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles and J. A. Briano
TI  - Vairimorpha invictae not detected in the parasitic fly, Pseudacteon obtusus, reared from the microsporidium-infected  fire ants, Solenopsis invicta.  [abstract]
2008;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon obtusus; pathogen; Vairimorpha invictae; 
AB  - The microsporidium Vairimorpha invictae and parasitic flies in the genus Pseudacteon have established or are being considered for release in the USA for the biological control of fire ants, Solenopsis invicta. Pseudacteon flies oviposit into adult fire ants, where maggots that eclose from eggs migrate to the ants' head, pupate, and eventually decapitate the host. The compatibility of these biocontrol agents was examined by determining if the parasitic fly, P. obtusus would become infected if it developed in the microsporidia-infected fire ants. P. obtusus were allowed to oviposit and develop in V. invictae infected S. invicta in the laboratory. There was no evidence of microsporidian infection in P. obtusus adults that developed in heads that were matched to infected bodies (n=39). S. invicta bodies that could not be matched with their decapitated heads had an estimated infection rate of 87%. V. invictae was not detected in any of the P. obtusus that emerged from unmatched heads (N=318). These results further defined the host specificity of V. invictae and indicated that V. invictae will not directly interfere with P. obtusus parasitism.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. Oi, S. Valles, S. Porter, C. Cavanaugh, G. White and J. Henke
TI  - Introduction and establishment of fire ant biocontrol agents in the Coachella Valley of California
2017;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; California; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; biocontrol; invasive species; 
AB  - In summary, releases of fire ant biological control agents were made in several irrigated urban landscapes in the Coachella Valley of California.  The microsporidian pathogen, Kneallhazia solenopsae, Solenopsis invicta virus-3, and two species of the fire ant decapitating phorid flies, Pseudacteon obtusus and P. curvatus, were recovered for at least 3 years.  All three types of agents increased in prevalence or spread from the original release locations, and have survived the extreme heat of the desert climate.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee (s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. Oi, S. Valles, S. Porter, C. Cavanaugh, G. White and J. Henke
TI  - Introduction of fire ant biological control agents into the Coachella Valley of California
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2019;102(1):284-286
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; California; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; entomopathogens; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Picornavirales; Solinviviridae; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; biocontrol; irrigation; invasive species; 
AB  - The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), is a stinging, invasive ant from South America that has plagued the southern US since the 1930s. It is currently established in parts of California, including the Coachella Valley. We introduced and established the fire ant decapitating phorid flies, Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier and Pseudacteon obtusus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae); Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (Picornavirales: Solinviviridae) (SINV-3); and the microsporidian fire ant pathogen Kneallhazia solenopsae Knell, Allan, & Hazard (Microsporida: Thelohaniidae) for the biological control of fire ants in this region of California. This is the first establishment of fire ant decapitating phorid flies in California. In addition, we demonstrated human-mediated establishment of SINV-3 and K. solenopsae in hot, dry, but irrigated, urban desert habitat.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. H. Oi and S. D. Porter
TI  - Parasitoids and pathogens used against imported fire ants in the southern United States
SO  - Contributions of Classical Biocontrol to the U.S. Food Security, Forestry, and Biodiversity 2022;FHAAST-2019-05:252-265
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis geminata x xyloni hybrid; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; distribution; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera: Phoridae; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporidia; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Vairimorpha invictae; virus; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; impact; agricultural; medical; quarantine; biocontrol; parasitoid flies; pathogens; microsporidium; virus; invasive species; 
AB  - The red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), black imported fire ant (Solenopsis richteri), and their hybrid, collectively called imported fire ants, or fire ants, are invasive ants that have become ubiquitous throughout the southern United States. They are aggressive ants that inflict painful stings, which in some cases, cause anaphylaxis. Their large, dominant populations can result in damage to crops, livestock, wildlife, and infrastructure (e.g., electrical equipment) with total estimated costs of over $8 billion annually for damage and control. Both the red and black species were well established and spreading in the United States by the late 1930s. An imported fire ant quarantine (>365 million acres) is established in the US to slow transport of materials with fire ants into uninfested areas. Fire ant stings are a major problem for people, livestock, and pets with control measures often requiring recurring insecticide treatments. Fire ants can thrive in a wide array of habitats, including unmanaged and/or inaccessible landscapes which serve as reservoirs for infestation of inhabited areas. Biological control is arguably the only viable regional strategy to suppress established populations of invasive ants. Six species of parasitoid flies and two pathogens (a microsporidium and a virus) have been released (1997-2014) and established for the biological control of fire ants in the USA. The flies attack worker ants and inhibit their foraging, while the pathogens cause the debilitation of queens and workers. Dramatic declines in fire ant populations have not occurred, but there is evidence for gradual long-term declines. Also, biocontrol agents appear to slow the reinfestation of areas temporarily cleared of fire ants via insecticide treatments. These agents represent the first concerted efforts to utilize classical and augmentative biological control for the long-term suppression of invasive fire ants. Knowledge gained from these efforts will facilitate projects to improve the biological control of fire ants and other invasive ants.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.
AU  - D. H. Oi, S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles and J. A. Briano
TI  - No detection of Vairimorpha invictae in fire ant decapitating flies reared from V. invictae- infected ants.  [abstract]
2008;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon obtusus; pathogen; microsporidian; Microsporidia; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; invasive species; rearing; 
AB  - Adult worker caste S. invicta from two V. invictae infected colonies were exposed for 3 days to P. obtusus in the laboratory.  Infection rates of the workers were 85% for each colony based on individual wet mounts of the workers (n=20 per colony) examined by microscopy.  After exposure to the flies, adult ants were held until decapitation.  Ant heads and bodies were collected individually and categorized as: 1) heads that could be matched definitively with bodies (head partially attached to body); 2) heads that probably belonged to particular bodies (head near body); and 3) heads that could not be assigned to specific bodies.  Individual headless bodies were examined for V. invictae spores by microscopy.  Within categories 1 & 2, heads that were associated with V. invictae infected bodies were grouped together.  Adult P. obtusus that emerged were separated by sex and grouped into samples of 7-13 individuals and tested for the presence of V. invictae by PCR.  P. obtusus adults that emerged from category 3 heads were sexed and grouped into sets of 16-21 flies for V. invictae PCR detection.  There was no evidence of V. invictae infection in P. obtusus adults that definitively developed (n=25) or mostly likely developed (N=34) in infected ants.  This indicated that the adult flies were not acquiring infection despite development in infected ant hosts.  S. invicta bodies that could not be matched with their head capsules had an estimated infection rate of 87% (82/94) based on ants from all 3 categories. V. invictae was not detected in any of the P. obtusus that emerged from the unmatched heads (N=318).  These results further defined the host specificity of V. invictae and indicated that V. invictae will not directly interfere with P. obtusus parasitism.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. H. Oi, S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles, J. A. Briano and L. A. Calcaterra
TI  - Pseudacteon decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae): Are they potential vectors of the fire ant pathogens Kneallhazia (=Thelohania) solenopsae (Microsporidia: Thelohaniidae) and Vairimorpha invictae (Microsporidia: Burenellidae)?
SO  - Biol. Control 2009;48(3):310-315
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; parasite; Microsporidia; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Thelohania solenopsae; Vairimorpha invictae; pathogen; biocontrol agents; biological control; vector; transmission; entomopathogen; microsporidiosis; infection; disease detection; invasive species; introduced species; 
AB  - Fire ant decapitating flies in the genus Pseudacteon were tested for their potential as hosts or vectors of two microsporidian pathogens of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. Decapitating flies that attacked or were reared from S. invicta workers infected by Kneallhazia (=Thelohania) solenopsae or Vairimorpha invictae were tested for either pathogen by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests or visual examination for spores using phase microscopy. Three species of fire ant decapitating flies acquired the pathogen, Kneallhazia solenopsae. K. solenopsae was detected in 58% of pooled samples of Pseudacteon obtusus flies and 44% of pooled samples of Pseudacteon cultellatus that developed in K. solenopsae-infected fire ant workers. K. solenopsae was also found in 17% of pooled samples of field-collected Pseudacteon curvatus. In contrast, the microsporidium V. invictae was not detected in P. obtusus reared from V. invictae-infected S. invicta workers. Neither K. solenopsae nor V. invictae were detected in any of the hovering or ovipositing flies in the laboratory exposures, indicating no mechanical acquisition of the microsporidia occurred during oviposition activity. Greater than 92% of the P. obtusus that developed in K. solenopsae-infected ants survived and emerged as adults, thus indicating no detrimental effects of the microsporidium on pupal development and emergence. These results indicate that Pseudacteon decapitating flies may be able to vector K. solenopsae but not V. invictae among fire ants. Further tests are planned to determine if flies containing K. solenopsae are capable of transferring this pathogen either during oviposition or by being consumed by fire ant larvae.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. H. Oi, S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles, J. A. Briano and L. A. Calcaterra
TI  - Presence of the fire ant pathogen Kneallhazia solenopsae in fire ant decapitating phorid flies.  [abstract]
2010(2009);MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; pathogen; Microsporidia; Thelohaniidae; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Thelohania solenopsae; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; 
AB  - Pathogens and parasites from South America are being evaluated for the biological control of imported fire ants in the U.S. Fire ant decapitating flies that developed in fire ants infected with the fire ant pathogen Kneallhazia (formerly Thelohania) solenopsae also acquired the pathogen. K. solenopsae was found in 51% of pooled samples, which included three species of flies: Pseudacteon obtusus, Pseudacteon cultellatus, and Pseudacteon curvatus. The infected P. curvatus were collected from the field in Florida. This is the first report of a fire ant pathogen being detected in another fire ant biocontrol agent. K. solenopsae was not detected in any of the hovering or ovipositing flies in laboratory exposures, indicating that mechanical acquisition of the pathogen did not occur during oviposition activity. Greater than 92% of the P. obtusus that developed in K. solenopsae-infected ants survived and emerged as adults. These preliminary observations indicated there were no detrimental effects of the pathogen on the flies. The finding of K. solenopsae in apparently healthy flies offers the possibility that the flies can transmit K. solenopsae, and perhaps facilitate the spread of the disease among fire ant populations.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. H. Oi, S. M. Valles and S. D. Porter
TI  - The fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) pathogen, Vairimorpha invictae (Microsporidia: Burenellidae), not detected in Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2012;95(2):506-508
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Mississippi; South Carolina; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; microsporidium; Microsporida; Protozoa; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Vairimorpha invictae; biocontrol; invasive species; 
AB  - Surveys were conducted to search specifically for the microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invictae in red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta), in the U.S. V. invictae was not detected in any of the 1,016 nest samples collected in 21 counties located in 5 states. A majority of samples (83%) originated from Florida. Despite the absence of V. invictae, another microsporidum, K. solenopsae, was detected in 14.5% of the samples. Based on our sampling, V. invictae is currently not established in the U.S. V. invictae represents an additional natural enemy that could be imported from South America for the classical biological control of S. invicta.  (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. H. Oi, D. F. Williams, R. M. Pereira, P. Horton, T. S. Davis, A. H. Hyder, H. T. Bolton, B. C. Zeichner, S. D. Porter, A. L. Hoch, M. L. Boswell and G. Williams
TI  - Combining biological and chemical controls for management of red imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Am. Entomol. 2008;54(1):44-53
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Forelius; Formica; Hypoponera; Lasius; Neivamyrmex; Paratrechina; Pheidole; Pyramica; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplohoptrum); Trachymyrmex; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; South Carolina; South America; Brazil; scientific; nests; foraging; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; pathogens; Thelohania solenopsae; biological control agents; chemical control; fipronil; insecticides; natural enemies; pesticide application; population growth; biocontrol; invasive species; pitfall traps; 
AB  - Two South American natural enemies of imported fire ants were first detected or released in the United States approximately 10 years ago. The fire ant pathogen, Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen, and Hazard, was found in the U.S. in 1996 and a parasitic phorid fly from Brazil, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, was released in 1997 and both are well established in fire ant infested areas. As biological control agents of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, their colony-level impact in the field is often indirect and subtle as they work slowly by debilitating queens and impeding foraging by workers. Their effect on colony densities may be inadequate in sensitive sites, where people have a low tolerance for fire ant stings, and where control may require faster-acting insecticide treatments. Comparisons of S. invicta populations and the presence of other ants were made among field sites that 1) were treated with insecticide containing fipronil and where the biocontrol agents T. solenopsae and P. tricuspis were also released and established (integrated site); 2) were treated only with the fipronil insecticide (chemical site); and, 3) were not treated (untreated site). S. invicta populations were suppressed by ≥95% for 3 years at the integrated site. In the chemical site, S. invicta control was ≤85% after 1.4 years, while the untreated site had an average 32% increase in population. Average prevalence of T. solenopsae among nests per plot peaked at 72% and P. tricuspis was observed at the release site and up to 5 km away. The average percentage of ants other than S. invicta collected in pitfall traps in the insecticide-treated area of the integrated site increased from 13% before treatment to 70% for the last 2 years of the study. In the chemical site, the percentage of non-S. invicta ants was 0.4% before insecticide application and averaged 9% for the final 2 years. Non-S. invicta ants averaged 9.6% (range, 2.7-17.3%) in the untreated site for the entire study. The extended reduction in S. invicta populations in the integrated site demonstrated a potential impact of the establishment of biological control agents for imported fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - F. M. Oi, D. H. Oi, S. D. Porter and P. G. Koehler
TI  - Fire ants: do's and don'ts
SO  - Pest Cont. Tech. 2001;29 (4):48, 52-54, 56
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; popular; biology; distribution; nest; impact; economic; medical; urban; chemical control; bait; invasive species; 

AU  - I. Olendraite, N. I. Lukhovitskaya, S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles and A. E. Firth
TI  - Polycipiviridae: a proposed new family of polycistronic picorna-like RNA viruses
SO  - J. Gen. Virol. 2017;98(9):2368-2378
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Formica exsecta; Lasius flavus; Lasius niger; Lasius neglectus; Linepithema humile; Myrmica scabrinodis; Monomorium pharaonis; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; Europe; England; UK; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; genome; disease; virus; taxonomy; Picornavirales; RNA virus; helicase; internal ribosome entry site; LneV-1; Lasius neglectus virus 1; LniV-1; Lasius niger virus 1; MsaV-1; Myrmica scabrinodis virus 1; open reading frame; protease; RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; SINV-2; Solenopsis invicta virus 2; SINV-4; Solenopsis invicta virus 4; single nucleotide polymorphism; transcriptome shotgun assembly; 
AB  - Solenopsis invicta virus 2 is a single-stranded positive-sense picorna-like RNA virus with an unusual genome structure. The monopartite genome of approximately 11 kb contains four open reading frames in its 5′ third, three of which encode proteins with homology to picornavirus-like jelly-roll fold capsid proteins. These are followed by an intergenic region, and then a single long open reading frame that covers the 3′ two-thirds of the genome. The polypeptide translation of this 3′ open reading frame contains motifs characteristic of picornavirus-like helicase, protease and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase domains. An inspection of public transcriptome shotgun assembly sequences revealed five related apparently nearly complete virus genomes isolated from ant species and one from a dipteran insect. By high-throughput sequencing and in silico assembly of RNA isolated from Solenopsis invicta and four other ant species, followed by targeted Sanger sequencing, we obtained nearly complete genomes for four further viruses in the group. Four further sequences were obtained from a recent large-scale invertebrate virus study. The 15 sequences are highly divergent (pairwise amino acid identities of as low as 17 % in the non-structural polyprotein), but possess the same overall polycistronic genome structure, which is distinct from all other characterized picorna-like viruses. Consequently, we propose the formation of a new virus family, Polycipiviridae, to classify this clade of arthropod-infecting polycistronic picorna-like viruses. We further propose that this family be divided into three genera: Chipolycivirus (2 species), Hupolycivirus (2 species) and Sopolycivirus (11 species), with members of the latter infecting ants in at least 3 different subfamilies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Adult worker Solenopsis invicta ants were collected from 46 nests in the E portion of the state of Formosa, Argentina.  Adult L. flavus, L. neglectus, L. niger, & M. scabrinodis ants were collected from individual nests in Cambridge, UK.  Other species listed are from Table 1 & contain viruses included in the proposed family Polycipiviridae.]
AU  - P. Parkman, K. Vail, T. Rashid, J. Oliver, R. M. Pereira, S. D. Porter, M. Shires, G. Haun, S. Powell, L. G. Thead and J. T. Vogt
TI  - Establishment and spread of Pseudacteon curvatus in Tennessee
2005;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Georgia; Mississippi; Tennessee; scientific; mounds; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspus; release; establishment; spread; 
AB  - All of the release sites were pastures witht he exception of the 2003 Franklin release of P. Curvatus which was made at an ornamental nursery, and the 2004 release which was made at a cemetery. All releases of P. curvatus were of the Los Flores biotype except for the July 2004 release in Hamilton Co. where the Formosan biotype was released and Monroe counties in 2000 and 2001 yielded no adult flies and the releases were considered failures. Collections of P. curvatus at the Franklin Co. pasture release site in July and August 2003 indicated the flies released the previous year had successfully overwintered and were established. Oly one P. tricuspis adult has been collected: at the Franklin Co. release site in July 2003.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. J. W. Patrock, S. D. Porter, L. E. Gilbert and P. J. Folgarait
TI  - Distributional patterns of Pseudacteon associated with the Solenopsis saevissima complex in South America
SO  - J. Insect Sci. 2009;9: 60:17 p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima complex; Myrmicinae; South America; scientific; classical biological control; imported fire ants; parasitoid; Phoridae; geographical ranges; host use patterns; 
AB  - Classical biological control efforts against the imported fire ants have largely involved the use of Pseudacteon parasitoids.  To facilitate further exploration for species and population biotypes we organized a database of collection records for Pseudacteon species, including those from the literature and other sources.  These data were then used to map the geographical ranges of species associated with the imported fire ants in their native range in South America.  In addition, we found geographical range metrics for all species in the genus and related these metrics to latitude and host use.  Approximately equal numbers of Pseudacteon species were found in temperate and tropical regions, though the majority of taxa found only in temperate areas were found in the Northern Hemisphere.  No significant differences in sizes of geographical ranges were found between Pseudacteon associated with the different host complexes of the fire ants despite the much larger and systemic collection effort  associated with the S. saevissima host group.  Geographical range of the flies was loosely associated with both the number of hosts and the geographical range of their hosts.  Pseudacteon with the most extensive ranges had either multiple hosts or hosts with broad distributions.  Mean species richnesses of Pseudacteon in locality species assemblages associated with S. saevissima complex ants was 2.8 species, but intensively sampled locations were usually higher.  We discuss possible factors related to variation in geographical range size and outline areas in southern South America that have likely been under-explored for Pseudacteon associated with imported fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. M. Pereira and S. D. Porter
TI  - Use of baits for evaluation of fire ant populations in the USDA areawide project.  [abstract]
2005;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; nest; populations; baits; mound counts; 
AB  - In sites used in the USDA-ARS Areawide Fire Ant Suppression project, ftre ant populations are monitored using baits (ant activity monitoring) or mound counts (mounds rated using the USDA Population Index [PI] rating). For ant activity monitoring, 10 slices of beef wieners are placed about 8-paces apart in a circle around the sampling plot centers. After 30-60 minutes, baits are observed and rated from 0-4 depending on number of ftre ants present at the bait. These observations allow the calculation of % of baits where IFA are present. All mounds present in the sampling plots are counted and given a rating varying from 1-10 depending on the number of ants in the nest and the absence (rating =1-5) or presence of brood (rating =6-10).  The treatment threshold used in this program is 20 mounds with PI>7 per acre, but no threshold has been established using the ant activity monitoring baits. Therefore, we were interested whether the ant activity as measured in the beef wiener baits corresponded to the level of ant population as measured by the mound counts and PI rating. This is important because the ant activity monitoring is: easier to use, less labor- and time intensive, more efficient in detecting low populations, and serves as an indicator of adequate time for chemical bait applications because it determines if foraging is occurring.  Data from all 5 cooperating states show that there is a strong correlation between the ant activity as measured by the baits and the ant population as measured by number of mounds or the PI.  Although the correlation is stronger when using the rating for the number of ants present at the baits, the percentage of baits occupied by fire ants also provide reliable information, with lesser requirement in effort and technical knowledge by the operator. The ant activity bait responds rapidly to an increase in ant population, and baits can be quickly overwhelmed by fire ants if populations are above levels usually considered damaging and in need of control The pre-established threshold (20 mounds/acre) corresponds to 30-45% ofthe baits occupied by fire ants.  In a simulation in the laboratory, the ant activity bait data were used as the decision tool in determining the need for fire ant control treatment in the different demonstration sites for the areawide project over the past 3-4 years. The decisions to apply formicides were similar in >80% of the times whether the mound counts-PI or the ant activity bait (% of bait occupied by fire ants) were used. Variation of the data negates any differences in the decisions when the different methods were used.  In conclusion, ant activity monitoring baits (slices of beef wieners) are good indicators of fire ant populations in pastures. Compared to mound counts-PI, ant activity baits tend to  underestimate the ant population in cooler months and overestimate the ant population in warmer months. However, because they are easier and less expensive to use, the ant activity monitoring baits can be recommended as a simple, user-friendly method for evaluation of fire ant populations, and as a decision tool in fire ant control programs.    (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. M. Pereira and S. D. Porter
TI  - Range expansion of the fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis, eight to nine years after releases in North Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2006;89(4):536-538
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; range expansion; parasitoid release; 
AB  - These rates of expansion are approximately 20-180% faster than the respective rates observed in 2001.  Currently the flies occupy about 86,500 km2 compared to the 8,100 km2 in the fall of 2001.  Higher rates of expansion could simply be the result of larger populations of flies or evolutionary selection of flies that disperse farther.  Decapitating flies are expanding northward at higher rates than they are to the south, but the reason for this is uncertain.  As the decapitating flies move further north, they will eventually encounter colder temperatures and shorter growing seasons which will permit fewer generations of flies per year and probably result in a slower rate of northward expansion.  Several successful releases have been made in South Florida, including in Bonita Springs (1999) and Sarasota, FL (2002).  Either site could be responsible for the fly population found in Arcadia, FL in Nov 2005, approximately 100 and 70 km away, respectively.   Releases in Dothan, AL (2000) may explain the flies found in Calhoun Co. in the Florida Panhandle, but recent field surveys have not recovered flies around Dothan.  Flies found in Calhoun Co. also could have originated in Gainesville, FL, based on the rate of expansion up the east coast of Georgia.  Considering the observed expansion rates and the additional successful releases of P. tricuspis in southern Florida and elsewhere in the state, it is likely that almost all of Florida will have resident populations of P. tricuspis in the next 3 to 5 years.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - M. A. Pesquero, S. Campiolo, H. G. Fowler and S. D. Porter
TI  - Diurnal patterns of ovipositional activity in two Pseudacteon fly parasitoids (Diptera: Phoridae) of Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1996;79(3):455-457
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; colony; temperature; temporal; season; diurnal; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; rearing; 
AB  - Two phorid parasitoids of Solenopsis fire ants in Brazil were active at different times of the day.  Pseudacteon litoralis was most active in the early morning and evening while P. tricuspis was most active during the afternoon.          *[Of 492 females collected over a year: P. curvatus, 3%; P. litoralis, 17%; P. obtusus, 4%; P. pradei, 1.6%; P. solenopsidis, 1.2%; P. tricuspis, 73%; P. wasmanni, 0.2%.]
AU  - M. A. Pesquero, H. G. Fowler and S. D. Porter
TI  - The social parasitic ant, Solenopsis (= Labauchena) daguerrei (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Sao Paulo, Brazil
SO  - Rev. Biol. Trop. 1998;46:464-465
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Labauchena daguerrei; Solenopsis daguerrei; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; distribution; host records; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Hymenoptera; parasitic ant; 

AU  - M. A. Pesquero, S. D. Porter, H. G. Fowler and S. Campiolo
TI  - Rearing of Pseudacteon spp. (Dipt. Phoridae), parasitoids of fire ants (Solenopsis spp.) (Hym., Formicidae)
SO  - J. Appl. Entomol. 1995;119(1-5):677-678
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; colony; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; rearing; 
AB  - After exposure of Solenopsis saevissima colonies maintained in plastic trays to phorid attack in the field, and subsequent transfer of colonies to covered plastic buckets, we confirmed the P. wasmanni and P. litoralis are indeed parasitoids of fire ant workers.  The period from attack to emergence of phorid adults ranged from 35 to 46 days.  Adult phorids were maintained live in glass vials with sugar water as a food source for 5 days.  These results indicate that Pseudacteon can be reared for biological control release programs with minimal difficulty.  Furthermore, parasitized workers could be easily transferred from South America to quarantine laboratories within the egg to adult emergence time period.
AU  - J. Petal, H. Jakubczyk and Z. Wojcik
TI  - Influence des fourmis sur les modifications des sols et des plantes dans les milieux de prairie
SO  - Methods of study in soil ecology 1970:235-240
MH  - ant; Formicidae; scientific; ecology; fauna; soil modification; grassland environment; habitats; 

AU  - G. O. Poinar, Jr., S. D. Porter, S. Tang and B. C. Hyman
TI  - Allomermis solenopsi n. sp. (Nematoda: Mermithidae) parasitising the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Argentina
SO  - Syst. Parasitol. 2007;68(2):115-128
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; entomopathogenic nematodes; Mermithidae; Allomermis solenopsi; morphology; taxonomy; molecular systematics; ribosomal DNA; nucleotide sequences; phylogeny; biocontrol agents; 
AB  - Allomermis solenopsi n. sp. (Mermithidae: Nematoda) is described from the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Argentina. Diagnostic characters of the new species include stiff and erect processes on the surface of the mature egg, small female amphids, extension of the latero-medial rows of male genital papillae beyond the middle rows, an obliquely truncate spicule tip and a ventrally swollen male terminus. This is the first record of Allomermis Steiner, 1924 from South America and the first host record for members of this genus. Previous records of mermithids from Solenopsis spp. are summarized. The placement in Allomermis was confirmed by molecular analyses based on nuclear 18S ribosomal DNA sequences, the first such molecular framework for the Mermithidae.  The possible life-cycle of the parasite is discussed, with the aim of using A. solenopsi as a biological control agent for fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - C. A. Porter, P. Thompson, H. L. Black and C. D. Jorgensen
TI  - Genetic variability in a population of Paraponera clavata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Southwest. Nat. 1986;31(3):381-385
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Paraponera clavata; Paraponerinae; North America; Panama; scientific; monogyny; colonies; genetics; genetic variation; heterozygosity; electrophoresis; allele; enzyme; loci; 
AB  - *[Electrophoretic variation was studied in a population of Paraponera clavata (F.) on Barro Colorado Island, Panama.  Nineteen of 20 loci were monomorphic, & variation was found in only one of 26 colonies.  All twenty workers examined from this colony were heterozygous for an alternate allele at Est-3.  The expected level of heterozygosity (Ĥ) of the population was 0.001, one of the lowest reported for ants.  This value is consistent with the generally observed low level of genetic variation among hymenopterans.  Some evidence was found for the presence of only one singly mated queen per colony of P. clavata.]
AU  - C. E. Porter
TI  - Hongos cultivados por hormigas
SO  - Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat. 1910;14:111
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South America; Chile; scientific; symbiosis; fungus; 

AU  - C. E. Porter
TI  - Larva que vive en simbiosis con hormigas
SO  - Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat. 1915;19:50
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South America; Chile; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; larvae; symbiosis; fungus; 

AU  - C. E. Porter
TI  - Bracónidos de los nidos de hormigas
SO  - Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat. 1923;27:194
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South America; Chile; scientific; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; Hymenoptera; Braconidae; 

AU  - C. E. Porter
TI  - Hormigas nuevas chilenas
SO  - Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat. 1923;27:196-197
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis gayi v. fazi; Solenopsis thoracica; Tapinoma fazi; Dolichoderinae; Myrmicinae; South America; Chile; scientific; taxonomy; distribution; 
AB  - Santischi described Solenopsis gayi v. fazi n. var., Solenopsis thoracica n. sp., & Tapinoma fazi n. sp. from Chile.
AU  - C. E. Porter
TI  - Hormigas contra piojos
SO  - Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat. 1926;30:401-402
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South America; Chile; scientific; fungus gardens; 

AU  - C. K. Porter and S. D. Porter
TI  - Fire ant biocontrol with phorid and other natural enemies
SO  - Landscape & Nursery Digest 1995;29(7):38-39
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Texas; Virginia; South America; Brazil; popular; biology; oviposition; behavior; foraging; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; Microsporida; Thelohania solenopsae; biocontrol; 

AU  - E. E. Porter and B. A. Hawkins
TI  - Latitudinal gradients in colony size for social insects: termites and ants show different patterns
SO  - Am. Nat. 2001;157(1):97-106
MH  - ant; Formicidae; scientific; colony size; latitudinal gradients; fasting endurance hypothesis; models; 
AB  - *[On the basis of a comparison of Nearctic & Neotropical ants, social insects have been proposed to show a latitudinal gradient in colony size.  Further, the 'fasting endurance hypothesis', which predicts larger colonies in areas with extended periods of low food availability, was proposed as the mechanism driving the gradient.  We conclude that the pattern identified for ants cannot be generalized to include social insects as a whole.  As is the case for ecogeographic gradients in insect body sizes, a pattern that is reported for one taxon may not be consistent for other taxa at the global level.]
AU  - S. Porter
TI  - General fire ant problem areas
SO  - The imported fire ant: Assessment and recommendations 1988:110
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; South America; review; biology; taxonomy; ecology; behavior; chemical control; biocontrol; impact; economic; quarantine; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Social structure of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex owyheei: a disposable forager strategy
1980;MH  - ant; Formicidae; foragers; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Pogonomyrmex salinus; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; caste; biomass; division of labor; age polyethism; longevity; 
AB  - Exterior workers of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex owyheei, were subdivided into forager, defender and refuse worker behavior roles (Fig. 2).  Exterior workers comprised approximately 16% of the total colony population with interior workers comprising the remainder.  An average of less than 10% of the total worker population foraged (Table 1).  Studies of role changes confirmed a general one-way progression from interior workers progressed toward foraging, their dry weights declined approximately 40% (Fig. 3) and mandible wear increased (Table 2).  Based on these results, we propose that P. owyheei has evolved a disposable forager strategy that tolerates high forager mortality.  The large reservoir of interior workers required by this strategy may also inhibit the evolution of physically specialized interior worker castes.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Fast, accurate method of measuring ant head widths
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1983;76(5):866-867
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Formica fusca; Pogonomyrmex badius; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polymorphism; worker size; caste size; methods; head width; 
AB  - A wedge micrometer, constructed from two microscope slides, provides a fast and accurate alternative to an ocular micrometer for measuring the width of ant heads and other similarly shaped objects.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Fire ant polymorphism: ergonomics of brood production
1984;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polymorphism; growth; colony formation; physiology; brood production efficiency; ergonomics; behavior; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Masoncus spider: a miniature predator of Collembola in harvester ant colonies
SO  - Psyche 1985;92:145-150
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster; Pogonomyrmex badius; Solenopsis; Trachymyrmex; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; predator; Araneae; Linyphiidae; Masoncus; mites; Belbidae; Laelaspidae; Rhodacaridae; Uropodidae; Thysanura; Nicoletiidae; Diplura; Japygidae; Coleoptera; Staphylinidae; millipede; 
AB  - An undescribed spider of the genus Masoncus (Linyphiidae: Erigoninae) was commonly found in colonies of the harvester ant Pogonomyrmex badius.  This miniature spider is a predator of Collembola and all of its life stages were present in the harvester ant colonies.  Includes table listing symbotic spiders & their hosts.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Revised respiration rates for the southern harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex badius
SO  - Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Comp. Physiol. 1986;83:197-198
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex badius; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; worker size; larvae; pupae; temperature; physiology; respiration; oxygen consumption; O2; bioenergetics; energy flow; respiration rate; metabolism; 
AB  - Respiration rates of Pogonomyrmex badius workers were very similar to other myrmicine ants, but 30 times less than previously reported (Golley and Gentry, 1964).
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Insect defenses.  (book review of "Defensive mechanisms in Social insects." H.R. Hermann, Ed.)
SO  - Bioscience 1986;36(3):196
MH  - ant; Formicidae; book review; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - The effects of boric acid bait on laboratory fire ant colonies
1988;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; chemical control; boric acid bait; 
AB  - Boric acid baits killed large numbers of fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) workers and larvae in laboratory colonies. Queens and pupae, however, were not eliminated, and most treated colonies resumed brood production after 3-5 weeks.  These results indicate that boric acid is not a suitable toxicant for large-scale or long-term control programs.  Nevertheless, boric acid might be useful in combination with growth hormones or for small areas that can be retreated every few months.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Impact of imported fire ants on native invertebrate communities
SO  - The imported fire ant: Assessment and recommendations 1988:65-69
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; review; biology; prey; polygyny; temperature; ecology; distribution; population; dispersal; impact; ecological; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Impact of temperature on colony growth and developmental rates of the ant, Solenopsis invicta
SO  - J. Insect Physiol. 1988;34(12):1127-1133
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; growth; temperature; nanitic brood; physiology; development rate; 
AB  - Growth rates of the fire ant, S. invicta, were studied across a range of constant temperatures.  Growth in established colonies only occurred at rather warm temperatures: between 24 and 36°C, with maximal growth around 32°C.  Colony growth ceased below 24°C even though 17°C was the theoretical minimum for brood development.  Total developmental time (egg to adult) for minor worker brood decreased from 55 days at 24°C to 23 days at 35°.  The proportion of time required by each developmental stage (i.e. eggs, larvae, pupae) was independent of temperature.  Nanitic brood developed about 35% faster than did minor worker brood, an important benefit for founding colonies.   Data are still fragmentary, but it appears that temperature-adjusted development rates of ants and other social Hymenoptera are quite similar.   (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Effects of diet on the growth of laboratory fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - J. Kansas Entomol. Soc. 1989;62(2):288-291
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; scientific; USA; Texas; scientific; diet; colony; growth; invasive species; 
AB  - Laboratory colonies of the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, were fed one of six diets: 1) sugar-water only, 2) insects only, 3) both insects and sugar-water, 4) and artificial diet, 5) an artificial diet plus insects, and 6) no food.  Colonies with access to both insects and sugar-water grew almost 10-fold by the end of the experiment.  Insects were essential; colonies lacking insects ceased brood production entirely.  A sugar source, though not essential, was very important.  Growth was reduced by 60% in colonies raised without sugar-water.  A commonly used artificial diet was not a suitable substitute for insect prey.  Even when this diet was supplemented with insects, it was no better than insects and sugar-water alone.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - The myrmecologist's bible.  (book review of "The ants." by Hölldobler, B. and Wilson, E.O.)
SO  - Am. Scient. 1990;78:461-46
MH  - ant; Formicidae; book review; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Overview
SO  - Applied myrmecology: a world perspective 1990:187-189
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex lobicornis; Anoplolepis; Atta cephalotes; Atta insularis; Atta laevigata; Atta texana; Camponotus; Iridomyrmex humilis; Monomorium pharaonis; Paratrechina fulva; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheidole megacephala; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; USA; South America; review; biology; colony founding; ecology; population; community; predator; parasite; symbiont; myrmecophile; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Thermoregulation in the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta.  [abstract]
SO  - Social insects and the environment 1990:660
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; temperature; ecology; mound; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Origins of new queens in polygyne red imported fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - J. Entomol. Sci. 1991;26(4):474-478
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; mating; flight; polygyny; dispersal; marking; 
AB  - Polygyne colonies of the fire ant, S. invicta, accepted newly mated queens both from their own colony and unrelated colonies.  Only a small fraction of the marked winged queens and newly mated queens were successful in joining test colonies in the field.  None of the founding queens were accepted into test colonies.  One marked colony queen switched colonies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Frequency and distribution of polygyne fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1992;75(2):248-257
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; biology; colony size; polygyny; monogyny; fat; ecology; distribution; population; mound; 
AB  - In order to determine the frequency and distribution of polygyne and monogyne fire ants (S. invicta) in Florida, preselected sites were surveyed from Key West to Tallahassee.  Polygyne colonies were found at 15% of infested sites - a frequency similar to other states in the southeastern United States, but much less than in Texas.  Polygyny was most common in the region around Marion county, but smaller populations were also scattered across the state.  The density of mounds at polygyne sites was more than twice that at monogyne sites (262 versus 115 Mounds/ha), although mound diameters were about 20% smaller.  Polygyne and monogyne queens averaged the same size (1.42 mm, head width), but monogyne queens were much heavier (24.3 mg versus 14.4 mg) due to their physogastry.  As expected, workers in polygyne colonies were considerably smaller than those in monogyne colonies (0.28 mg versus 0.19 mg, dry fat-free).   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Stability of polygyne and monogyne fire ant populations (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis invicta) in the United States
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1993;86(5):1344-1347
MH  - ant; Formicidae; North America; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; physogastry; insemination; distribution; population; exotic species; 
AB  - Over the past decade, polygyne red imported fire ants (S. invicta Buren) have been found at more and more sites across the southeastern United States.  The objective of my study was to determine if polygyne (multiple-queen) populations are expanding and at what rate this might be occurring.  More than 200 sites were inspected for polygyny in Florida and several other southeastern states.  These sites were reinspected 1-3 yr later.  Results showed that polygyne populations were not expanding rapidly in the areas studied (i.e.>4-6% per yr); however, more data will be needed to determine if polygyne populations are expanding slowly (i.e.1-2% per yr).  Overall, polygyne and monogyne sites were about 95% stable from year to year (i.e., they did not commonly switch back and forth from one form to the other).  As expected, average mound densities in the Florida survey (62 sites) remained relatively constant from 1990 to 1992.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Fire ant thermoregulation.  [abstract]
SO  - Les Insectes Sociaux. 12th Congress of the International Union for the Study of Social Insects, Paris, Sorbonne, 21-27 August 1994 1994:69
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; brood tending; season; thermoregulation; thermal regulation; temperature; thermal optima; behavior; mound building; tracking; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Potential use of Pseudacteon phorid flies as fire ant biocontrol agents.  [abstract]
1995;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; distribution; behavior; defensive postures; defensive behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; 
AB  - The imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta is one of the most abundant insect pests in the southeastern United States. With average densities of 1,500-3,500 ants/m2, these pests are virtually ubiquitous in parks, pastures, yards and cultivated fields. Fire ant densities in the United States are about five times higher than those in South America. Escape from numerous natural enemies left behind in South America is a likely explanation for this difference.  At least 18 species of Pseudacteon flies have been found attacking fire ants in South America. Each species has a distinctively shaped ovipositor that is presumably used in a lock and key fashion to lay eggs on a particular part of an ant's body. These flies appear to be common and active throughout most of the year, but different species are sometimes more active at different times of the day. Most species are broadly distributed across a wide range of habitats and climates.  The maggots of at least one and probably all Pseudacteon species develop in the heads of fire ant workers. Larval development takes about 2-3 weeks. Just prior to pupation, the third instar maggot appears to release an enzyme that dissolves the membranes that hold the exoskeleton together. The maggot then proceeds to consume the entire contents of the ant's head, a process that usually results in decapitation of its living host. The headless body is usually left with its legs and sting still twitching. The maggot then pushes the mouth parts aside and pupates within the empty head capsule positioned so that the anterior three segments precisely fill the oral cavity. The remainder of the puparium remains unsclerotized and is protected by the head capsule. The workers carry the head capsule with the puparium outside shortly after the host is killed. Pupal development requires about three weeks.  Fire ant workers are keenly aware of the presence of phorid flies. The presence of a single fly usually stops or greatly reduces the foraging efforts of hundreds of workers in only a minute or two. As soon as a fly appears, many workers will retreat into the exit hole or find cover. Other workers will curl into a stereotypical c-shaped defensive posture that has not been seen except when the ants are under attack by phorid flies. The flies will inhibit fire ant foraging as long as they are present, often for periods of several hours. Several flies are also sufficient to stop nest construction or freeze the activity of entire colonies in laboratory nest trays. The overall impact of these flies on fire ant populations is unknown; however, it is sufficient to have caused the evolution of a number of phorid-specific defense behaviors.   All Pseudacteon flies are almost certainly parasites of ants. They have never been reported to attack any other kind of organism, and virtually all phylogenetically related phorid genera are also ant parasites. Their elaborate ovipositors and the adaptations of at least one species for pupation in the head capsules of worker ants further supports the conclusion that they are very specialized parasites. The Pseudacteon species that attack fire ants appear to be specific to fire ants. The host specificity of several parasitic Pseudacteon flies in South America was tested in the field with 23 species of ants from 13 genera. As expected, these flies were attracted only to Solenopsis fire ants. Further tests are necessary, but these results strongly suggest that Pseudacteon flies will not pose an ecological danger, either to other arthropods or to other ant genera if they were introduced as natural biological control agents for imported fire ants in the United States.  In summary, phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are a promising group of biological control agents for fire ants because: 1) they are specific in their host preferences, 2) they are broadly distributed across time, space, and climate, and 3) their impact on fire ant populations is sufficient to have caused the evolution of several phorid-specific defense behaviors. Successful release of these flies would not eradicate imported fire ants, but it might tilt the ecological balance in favor of our native ants. If this happens, fire ant populations in the United States could be reduced to levels similar to those in South America.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Accessing "FORMIS: a master bibliography of ant literature" on the World Wide Web.  [abstract]
SO  - Social insects at the turn of the millenium.  Proceedings of the XIII International Congress of IUSSI, Adelaide Australia, 29 December 1998 - 3 January 1999 1998:377
MH  - ant; Formicidae; scientific; bibliography; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Biology and behavior of Pseudacteon decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae) that parasitize Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1998;81(3):292-309
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Formica; Lasius; Linepithema; Liometopum; Myrmica; Neivamyrmex; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis interrupta; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis megergates; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima; Tapinoma; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Europe; Netherlands; North America; Costa Rica; Honduras; USA; Florida; Texas; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; scientific; biology; colony; ecology; distribution; community structure; biogeography; community ecology; population density; behavior; foraging; attack behavior; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; life history; parasitoids; parasites; parasitism; host parasite relationships; decapitation; host specificity; life cycle; mating behavior; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon affinis; Pseudacteon antiguensis; Pseudacteon arcuatus; Pseudacteon bifidus; Pseudacteon bispinosus; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon browni; Pseudacteon comatus; Pseudacteon convexicauda; Pseudacteon crawfordi; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon dentiger; Pseudacteon formicarum; Pseudacteon grandis; Pseudacteon lenkoi; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon longicauda; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon nr. pradei; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon spatulatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; impact; ecological; biocontrol; 
AB  - Larvae of phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon have the unusual habit of decapitating fire ant workers and pupating inside the empty head capsule which they use as a pupal case.  Flies in this genus are the subject of considerable interest because they have the potential of being used as classical biological control agents against imported fire ants in North America.  This paper details what is known and not known about their interesting life history, attack behavior, mating behavior, host specificity, and impacts on fire ant behavior.  The biogeography, community structure, and possible impacts on fire ant populations are also considered.  *[Includes lots of unpublished information.  Pseudacteon have only been reported as parasites of ants.  Only a few species attack the non-Solenopsis genera listed.  Pseudacteon that attack fire ants are only associated with S. geminata, S. invicta, S. richteri, or S. saevissima.  S. interrupta, S. macdonaghi, S. megergates, or S. quinquecuspis have never been reported to be attacked by any Pseudacteon.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)                    ***The Pseudacteon sp. B, Table 1, listed here are really a new species, Pseudacteon bifidus, according to Brown, B.V., & L.W. Morrison, 1999, New Pseudacteon (Diptera: Phoridae) from North America that parasitizes the native fire ant Solenopsis geminata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 92: 308-311.***]
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Host-specific attraction of Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae) to fire ant colonies in Brazil
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1998;81(1):423-429
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; colony; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; host specificity; host preferences; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; nontarget organisms; 
AB  - Pseudacteon fly host-specificity tests were conducted in the field in southeastern Brazil with Solenopsis fire ants in the saevissima and geminata complexes.  These parasitic flies showed a strong preference for fire ants in the saevissima complex.  No Pseudacteon flies were attracted to three S. geminata (F.) colonies when they were set out in trays, but many flies were quickly attracted to three trays with saevissima complex colonies when they were set out between the S. geminata colonies.  Even when both species of ants were placed together side by side, more than 99% of flies hovered over trays with saevissima complex ants.  When all of the saevissima colonies were removed, leaving only the S. geminata colonies available, about 95% of flies flew away.  Several flies, however, did transfer to the S. geminata colonies for a few minutes and at least one fly (P. wasmanni) attacked a few S. geminata workers.  Altogether, 588 parasitized workers were collected from the saevissima complex colonies compared to 12 from the S. geminata colonies. Two hundred-sixty-two flies emerged from the saevissima complex colonies (52% P. tricuspis Borgmeier, 39% P. litoralis Borgmeier, 4.6% P. wasmanni Schmitz, 2.7% P. pradei Borgmeier, 0.4% P. curvatus Borgmeier).  No adult flies emerged from the S. geminata colonies.  These results demonstrate that P. tricuspis and P. litoralis are highly specific to saevissima complex fire ants and strongly indicate that they would pose little threat to native fire ants should they be released as biocontrol agents for imported fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Field release of phorid flies for fire ant biocontrol.  [title only]
1998;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; biocontrol; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Book Review: Taber, S.W., 1998, The world of the harvester ants, Texas A&M University Press, 213 p
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1999;82:375-376
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Ephebomyrmex; Pogonomyrmex; Myrmicinae; North America; South America; book review; biology; morphology; taxonomy; key; ecology; 

AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Host specificity and risk assessment of releasing the decapitating fly, Pseudacteon curvatus, as a classical biocontrol agent for imported fire ants
SO  - Biol. Control 2000;19(1):35-47
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster miamiana; Camponotus impressus; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Crematogaster minutissima; Crematogaster pilosa; Dorymyrmex bureni; Dorymyrmex smithi; Forelius pruinosus; Lasius neoniger; Leptothorax pergandei; Linepithema humile; Pheidole crassicornis; Pheidole diversipilosa; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole megacephala; Pheidole morrisi; Pseudomyrmex ejectus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Tetramorium simillimum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Arizona; California; Florida; Oklahoma; Texas; South America; Argentina; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Apocephalus; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon onyx; Pseudacteon spatulatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; parasitoid; classical biocontrol; host preference; host specificity; risk assessment; rearing; 
AB  - Host specificity of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus was studied to determine if this species is suitable for release as a classical biocontrol agent of imported fire ants in the United States.  A series of no-choice tests with 19 species of ants from 12 genera showed that P. curvatus will not develop in ants outside the genus Solenopsis.  P. curvatus successfully parasitized the native fire ants Solenopsis geminata and Solenopsis xyloni in no-choice tests, but rates of parasitism were considerably less than those with the imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta (6% and 35% of the rate for S. invicta, respectively).  Paired preference tests showed that P. curvatus has a 3- to 4-fold preference for S. invicta over either of the native fire ants.  Furthermore, flies reared from native fire ants still strongly preferred imported fire ants.  P. curvatus was not attracted to vegetables, fruits, meat, prepared foods, carrion, or dung.  This study indicates that release of P. curvatus will pose only a small risk to native fire ants.  The argument is made that this risk needs to be balanced against potential benefits to numerous other native organisms and a high probability that release of this fly would actually benefit native fire ants because impacts on imported fire ants would almost certainly be much greater than those on native fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Solenopsis invicta - yes, Solenopsis wagneri - no! [abstract]
2002;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis wagneri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; scientific; taxonomy; 
AB  - *S. wagneri = S. invicta, [S. wagneri has been supressed in favor of S. invicta, Anon. 2001.]                  In December 1997, Steven O. Shattuck, Sanford D. Porter and Daniel P. Wojcik formally applied to the International Commission of Zoological Nomenclature to conserve the name Solenopsis invicta and suppress the name Solenopsis wagneri for the Red Imported Fire Ant. That application was published in March 1999. In September 1999, Drs. Walter R. Tschinkel, Edward O. Wilson, and S. B. Vinson wrote in support of this application and Stephen W. Taber wrote in opposition. In June 2001, the Commission formally approved this application by a 20-2 vote. Editors and others unaware of this decision should be referred to: International Commission of Zoologicd Nomenclature.  2001. Opinion 1976. Solenopsis invicta Buren 1972.(Insecta, Hymenoptera): specific name conserved.  Bulletin of Zoological Nomenclature 58: 156-157.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - A simple design for a rain-resistant pitfall trap
SO  - Insect. Soc. 2005;52(2):201-203
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; methods; pitfall trap; collecting; 
AB  - Heavy rain causes major problems with using pitfall traps to collect ants and other surface-active arthropods. A simple design for a rain-resistant pitfall trap is described. The trap is constructed by grinding a hole in the side of a plastic vial and then covering it with fine-gage wire screen. This hole allows excess water to drain out the side of the trap. A method for quickly setting small-diameter pitfalls into the ground with an auger and a battery-powered drill is also described.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter
TI  - Distribution of the Formosa strain of the fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) three and a half years after releases in North Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2010;93(1):107-112
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biocontrol; strains; biotypes; population density; geographical distribution; surveys; range expansion; introduced species; 
AB  - The Formosa biotype of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier was released and successfully established as a self-sustaining biocontrol agent of the red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren at several sites around Gainesville, FL in 2003. In order to determine the status of these releases, 59 sites were surveyed for flies in the fall of 2006 with sticky traps and aspirators. Results of this survey showed that the flies had expanded outward an average of 74 km and occupied more than 30,000 km2 in North Central Florida. This rate of expansion was faster than rates reported for Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier in Florida, Louisiana, and Texas. The rapid rates of expansion and high densities reported for the Formosa biotype of P. curvatus indicate that it is a vigorous parasitoid which will require relatively fewer field releases to establish it as biocontrol agent of red imported fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and [compiler]
TI  - FORMIS: a master bibliography of ant literature
1999:no pagination
MH  - ant; Formicidae; bibliography; database; literature; review; 
AB  - FORMIS99 is a composite of several ant literature databases. It contains citations for a large fraction of the world's ant literature (almost 29,000 references).  It can be downloaded or searched online:  http://cmave.usda.ufl.edu/~formis/.  Specialty databases include:  Fire Ant Literature Database - (about 2700 citations).  Daniel P. Wojcik and Sanford D. Porter.  Comprehensive Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibliography - (about 3000 citations).  Harold G. Fowler and F. M. Schlittler.  Pharaoh Ant Bibliography - (about 1000 citations).  Karen Vail; David F. Williams, Klaus-Peter Berndt,  Wolfdietrich Eichler; Jerzy Wisniewski.  Santschi Ant Bibliography - (210 citations) Rolf E. Meier.  RFORMICA- Russian Wood Ant Literature Database - (almost 800 citations) Vladilen E. Kipyatkov, Dmitri S. Malyshev.    ANTBIB, A bibliography of ant systematics - (about 8,000 citations) Philip S. Ward, Barry Bolton, Steven O. Shattuck, William L. Brown, Jr.
AU  - S. D. Porter and L. E. Alonso
TI  - Host specificity of fire ant decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae) in laboratory oviposition tests
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1999;92(1):110-114
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster fulva; Aphaenogaster miamiana; Camponotus floridanus; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Forelius pruinosus; Neivamyrmex opacithorax; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Brazil; scientific; polygyny; monogyny; behavior; biocontrol; symphile; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; 
AB  - Host specificities of three species of Pseudacteon decapitating flies (P. litoralis Borgmeier, P. tricuspis Borgmeier, P. wasmanni Schmitz) were tested in quarantine facilities in Gainesville, Florida, USA.  Female flies from Brazil were placed into test trays containing either red imported fire ants (S. invicta Buren), tropical fire ants (S. geminata Forel), or native ants from six other genera (Crematogaster, Pheidole, Aphaenogaster, Neivamyrmex, Forelius, Camponotus).  Tests lasted 60-90 min.  The three species of flies tested were all at least 15 times more likely to attack their natural host, S. invicta, than they were to attack the native fire ant, S. geminata.  More than 200 larvae resulted from numerous attacks on S. invicta workers.  No larvae resulted from the few possible attacks on S. geminata or the other species of ants that were tested.  We induced several P. tricuspis to attack a few S. geminata workers by mixing these workers in with freeze-killed S. invicta workers.  One adult fly emerged from these attacks, demonstrating that P. tricuspis can develop in S. geminata workers.  This indicates that field release of P. tricuspis poses some risk to native fire ants; however, the extremely low rates of attack on S. geminata in the lab and in the field indicate that this risk would be minimal.  The argument is made that this small risk is acceptable because, among other things, native fire ants are under much more risk from expanding populations of imported fire ants than they would be from imported Pseudacteon flies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)                                             *[Flies collected while attacking S. invicta & S. saevissima in Brazil.  Remainder of species tested in the USA.]
AU  - S. D. Porter, A. P. Bhatkar, R. Mulder, S. B. Vinson and D. J. Clair
TI  - Distribution and density of polygyne fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Texas
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1991;84(3):866-874
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; polygyny; population; mound density; foraging; bait; temperature; invasive species; native species; 
AB  - Multiple-queen or 'polygyne' S. invicta Buren colonies are a serious economic and environmental concern because they occur in much higher densities than the monogyne form.  Polygyne colonies have been found at numerous locations in the United States; nevertheless the frequency and distribution of this form is poorly known.  We surveyed almost 700 roadside sites in 168 Texas counties.  Polygyny was discovered at 54% of the infested sites.  Polygyne populations were scattered in a mosaic across Texas.  The frequency of polygyny varied somewhat with geographic region, but the pattern was generally unrelated to habitat and environmental conditions.  Polygyne sites averaged more than twice as many mounds per hectare as monogyne sites.  Populations of monogyne and polygyne forms were slightly lower in cooler and in drier portions of the state.  Mounds of both forms were about the same size.  Polygyny was correlated with lower rates of sexual production and reduced numbers of native ants.  The high frequency of polygyny in Texas indicates that the fire ant problem in the state is much greater than previously realized.   (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and M. A. Bowers
TI  - Emigration of an Atta colony
SO  - Biotropica 1980;12(3):232
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Atta columbica; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; Panama; colony movement; emigration; 

AU  - S. D. Porter and M. A. Bowers
TI  - Caste partitioned survivorship and route fidelity of leaf-cutting ant workers.  [Abstract]
SO  - The biology of social insects. Proceedings of the Ninth Congress of the IUSSI, Boulder, Colorado, August, 1982 1982:254
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Atta colombica; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; Panama; scientific; caste; worker size; worker longevity; route fidelity; survivorship; polymorphism; population; refuse; 

AU  - S. D. Porter and J. Briano
TI  - Parasitoid-host matching between the little decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus from Las Flores, Argentina and the black fire ant Solenopsis richteri
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2000;83(4):422-427
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; South America; Argentina; scientific; hybrid; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; host preference; biocontrol; 
AB  - Matching potential biocontrol agents to target host populations can greatly improve the success of biological control efforts.  This study was designed to determine if the fly P. curvatus Borgmeier from Las Flores, Buenos Aires Provence, Argentina prefers its natural host the black fire ant S. richteri Forel.  Preferences for S. richteri from Argentina, S. richteri from the United States, and hybrid (S. richteri x S. invicta) fire ants from the United States were almost the same (~70%) when tested against S. invicta from the United States (~30%).  The time to pupation of developing parasitoids was 10% and 21% longer in hybrid and red fire ants than in black fire ants.  Parasitism rates, however, were not significantly different among these ant hosts in no-choice parasitism tests.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and L. A. Calcaterra
TI  - Dispersal and competitive impacts of a third fire ant decapitating fly (Pseudacteon obtusus) established in North Central Florida
SO  - Biol. Control 2013;64(1):66-74
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; scientific; competitive exclusion; competitive displacement; coexistence; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; expansion rates; introduced species; invasive species; intra-guild competition; 
AB  - Self-sustaining classical biological control agents offer hope for permanent wide-area control of imported Solenopsis fire ants in the United States because escape from abundant natural enemies left behind in Argentina is a likely reason for unusually high fire ant densities in the United States. The fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon obtusus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae) was released as a biocontrol agent of the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta Buren) in Gainesville, FL because it is a common parasitoid of this ant in Argentina and because it has a higher propensity of attacking fire ants along foraging trails than the two Pseudacteon species previously released. Field surveys of a rapidly expanding P. obtusus population (8-12 km/yr) proved that this fly was capable of thriving and successfully competing with the much more abundant Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier. However, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, the first decapitating fly released, was effectively excluded from most sample sites when faced with competition from both P. curvatus and the similar-sized P. obtusus. Despite clear evidence for competitive exclusion, P. tricuspis abundance at sample sites was positively correlated with the abundance of its two competitors - - probably because of moderate to strong covariability in the suitability of sample sites for all three congeners. The addition of P. curvatus, the second parasitoid released, increased total parasitism pressure on fire ant populations by about 10-fold. The addition of P. obtusus, the third species, did not measurably improve total guild parasitism rates on imported fire ants in North Central Florida (as assessed by roadside trap counts), but the performance of this species will likely vary with habitat, region, and climate.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and D. A. Eastmond
TI  - Euryopis coki (Theridiidae), a spider that preys on Pogonomyrmex ants
SO  - J. Arachnol. 1982;10(3):275-277
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Pogonomyrmex salinus; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; behavior; attack behavior; predator; Araneae; Theridiidae; spider; Euryopis coki; 
AB  - *[E. coki appears to be a fairly important predator of P. owyheei in southern Idaho, especially in late July & early August.]
AU  - S. D. Porter, H. G. Fowler, S. Campiolo and M. A. Pesquero
TI  - Host specificity of several Pseudacteon (Diptera: Phoridae) parasites of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in South America
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1995;78(1):70-75
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex rugosus; Atta sexdens; Camponotus; Camponotus abdominalis; Camponotus angulatus; Camponotus blandus; Camponotus rufipes; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Ectatomma quadridens; Monomorium pharaonis; Myrmelachista autori; Odontomachus brunneus; Odontomachus haematodus; Odontomachus minutus; Pachycondyla striata; Paratrechina; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheidole; Pheidole oxyops; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis saevissima; Dolichoderinae; Ectatomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Myrmosicarius grandicornis; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; host specificity; 
AB  - We tested the host specificity of several parasitic Pseudacteon scuttle flies in South America with 23 species of ants in 13 genera.  None of these ant species attracted parasitic Pseudacteon parasites except S. saevissima (F.Smith) and to a lesser extent S. geminata (Fab.).  This result is encouraging because it indicates that Pseudacteon flies tested in this study would not pose an ecological danger to other ant genera if these flies were introduced into the United States as classical biological control agents of imported fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[M. grandicornis on Atta sexdens; all Pseudacteon spp. on Solenopsis spp.; 2 unidentified phorids appeared to be attracted to a Paratrechina sp. colony]
AU  - S. D. Porter, H. G. Fowler and W. P. MacKay
TI  - A comparison of fire ant population densities in North and South America
SO  - Social insects and the environment 1990:623-624
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; scientific; ecology; mound; population density; 

AU  - S. D. Porter, H. G. Fowler and W. P. Mackay
TI  - Fire ant mound densities in the United States and Brazil (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1992;85(4):1154-1161
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis pusillignis; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; Alabama; Mississippi; Louisiana; South America; Brazil; Mato Grosso do Sul; scientific; biology; colony size; polygyny; monogyny; caste; physiology; ecology; distribution; population; mound; abundance; behavior; foraging; bait; invasion; biological release; biocontrol; 
AB  - To compare fire ant populations (Solenopsis) in North and South America, we surveyed 102 preselected roadside sites, half in the southeastern United States and half in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.  Fire ants were considerably more abundant in the United States.  They occurred at more sites (100 versus 70%), in higher densities (170 versus 30 mounds/ha), in larger mounds (27.0 versus 13.8 liters), and they constituted a larger fraction of the local ant community (97 versus 13% of occupied baits).  These data are consistent with the hypothesis that North American populations of S. invicta have escaped natural biological control; however, cultural and climatic factors are also likely explanations.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, J. M. Gavilanez-Slone and S. M. Valles
TI  - Solenopsis invicta virus 3: infection tests with adult honey bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2016;99(4):729-733
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; host-specificity tests; biocontrol; host range; 
AB  - Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) is a positive sense, single-stranded RNA virus that has considerable potential as a self-sustaining or classical biocontrol agent against the invasive fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) because it can cause substantial mortality in colonies of this species. Based on extensive host specificity tests with other ants, we predicted that SINV-3 would not infect the honey bee, Apis mellifera L. (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Nevertheless, because of the economic importance of honey bees, it was necessary to confirm this prediction before proceeding with field release of SINV-3 into regions where it does not yet occur. To test our prediction, we 1) examined field bees for the presence of the virus, 2) conducted specific searches of the GenBank databases for sequences (amino acid and nucleotide) with identity to SINV-3, and 3) inoculated laboratory groups of honey bees with large doses of SINV-3. SINV-3 was not detected in field bees or in GenBank libraries associated with honey bees, Apoidea, or non-host Insecta generally. Western blot analysis for SINV-3 capsid proteins showed that viral proteins were not produced in inoculated honey bees, but were produced in inoculated fire ants. Furthermore, qPCR analysis revealed no significant increase in SINV-3 quantity in honey bees, beyond the inoculating dose, whereas virus quantity dramatically increased over time in inoculated fire ants. Based on these results, we conclude that field release of SINV-3 as a biocontrol agent against red imported fire ants in regions without the virus would pose little or no threat to honey bees.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Assessing host specificity and field release potential of fire ant decapitating flies (Phoridae: Pseudacteon)
SO  - Assessing host ranges for parasitoids and predators used for classical biological control: a guide to best practice 2004:152-176
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster; Camponotus; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Forelius; Lasius; Leptothorax; Linepithema; Neivamyrmex; Odontomachus; Pheidole; Pseudomyrmex; Solenopsis daguerrei; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis xyloni; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Tetramorium; Trachymyrmex; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; South Carolina; Texas; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; biology; colony; ecology; distribution; community structure; biogeography; community ecology; population density; behavior; foraging; attack behavior; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite life history; parasitoids; parasites; parasitism; host parasite relationships; decapitation; host specificity; life cycle; mating behavior; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon nr. obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; pathogen; Microsporidia; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; impact; ecological; biocontrol; released agents; introduced agents; choice tests; field tests; feeding preference tests; risk assessment; 
AB  - Fire ant populations in their South American homelands are about 1/5 to 1/10 of populations normally found in North America. This intercontinental difference in fire ant densities is not explained by differences in climate, habitat, soil type, land use, plant cover, or sampling protocols. Escape from numerous natural enemies left behind in South America is the most apparent explanation for the intercontinental population differences. Classical or self-sustaining biocontrol agents are currently the only current hope for permanent regional control of fire ants. Successful release of biocontrol agents will not eradicate imported fire ants, but it could help tilt the ecological balance in favor of native ants. If this happened, fire ant populations in the United States could be reduced to levels similar to those in South America. Fire ant decapitating flies in the genus Pseudacteon are being evaluated for fire ant biocontrol. This chapter was written by a scientist at the USDA-ARS, Center for Medical, Agricultural and Veterinary Entomology in Gainesville, Florida and a scientist at Brackenridge Field Laboratory and the Section of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin. The chapter was written to discusses the biology of fire ant decapitating flies and detail the process of studying their host specificity and evaluating potential risks and benefits associated with their field release. The chapter discusses how information on host range from the literature, field observations, field tests, no-choice tests and choice tests was used to evaluate the environmental safety of releasing decapitating flies in the field as fire ant biocontrol agents. Results of these tests predicted that that fire ant decapitating flies would be very host specific and would present no danger to anything except for fire ants. Post-release host range tests have so far confirmed the pre-release predictions.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Strategies for assessing the host specificity of fire ant decapitating flies (Phoridae: Pseudacteon)
SO  - Second International Symposium on Biological Control of Arthropods; September 12-16, 2005. Scientic Program, Friday 16 Sept. 2005, Session 13, 11:35 2005:81
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; behavior; foraging; attack behavior; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; decapitation; host specificity; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; released agents; introduced agents; choice tests; field tests; feeding preference tests; host range testing; fly biotypes; 

AU  - S. D. Porter and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Parasitoid case history: An evaluation of methods used to assess host ranges of fire ant decapitating flies
SO  - Second International Symposium on Biological Control of Arthropods; September 12-16, 2005, Davos, Switzerland 2005;2:634-650
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Mississippi; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; biology; distribution; behavior; species specific alarm pheromone; foraging; attack behavior; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; decapitation; host specificity; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; released agents; introduced agents; no-choice tests; choice tests; sequential no-choice tests; field tests; feeding preference tests; host range testing; biotypes; cryptic species; nontarget species; naive females; experienced females; large females; alternate hosts; oviposition; test chambers; model; 
AB  - The first three papers in this section have discussed factors that affect the efficiency and success of laboratory host range tests. This paper presents an evaluation of how well those factors applied to our investigations of host ranges of fire ant decapitating flies in the genus Pseudacteon (Diptera: Phoridae). We initially discuss the nature of the fire ant problem (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis spp.) and the need for effective self-sustaining biological control agents. We briefly review the biology of Pseudacteon decapitating flies, the overall results of our host range tests, and the current status of field releases of these biological control agents. We conclude by discussing how well the recommendations of the three initial papers about 1) statistical procedures, 2) biotypes and cryptic species, and 3) experimental design, plus a recent book on the subject of host range testing, apply to our experiences with fire ant decapitating flies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, L. E. Gilbert, S. J. Johnson, L. C. Graham, P. M. Horton and T. Lockley
TI  - Release and establishment of the fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis, in the southeastern United States.  [poster paper]
2003;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee Texas; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Psuedacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; 

AU  - S. D. Porter, L. C. Graham, S. J. Johnson, L. G. Thead and J. A. Briano
TI  - The large decapitating fly Pseudacteon litoralis (Diptera: Phoridae) successfully established on fire ant populations in Alabama
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2011;94(2):208-213
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; South America; Argentina; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; biocontrol; strains; biotypes; population density; geographical distribution; surveys; range expansion; introduced species; 
AB  - The large fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon litoralis Borgmeier, from northeastern Argentina was successfully released as a self-sustaining biocontrol agent of imported fire ants in south central Alabama in 2005. Five years later, this fly is firmly established at the original release site and has expanded outward at least 18 km. Nevertheless, populations remain very low considering P. litoralis is one of the most abundant fire ant decapitating flies in large areas of its range in South America. The reasons for low densities and why we were only able to establish this fly at 1 of 9 release sites in 4 states (2003-2006) are unknown, but problems with host-matching, release procedures, weather conditions, and competition with previously released decapitating flies are discussed as possible factors.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and S. Higashi
TI  - What should Japan be doing about S. invicta? [in Japanese]
SO  - Biology of Solenopsis invicta, especially behavioral ecology and molecular genetics [in Japanese] 2008:163-175
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; Asia; Japan; North America; USA; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; biology; ecology; behavior; 

AU  - S. D. Porter and C. D. Jorgensen
TI  - Recapture studies of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex owyheei Cole, using a fluorescent marking technique
SO  - Ecol. Entomol. 1980;5:263-269
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; mortality; forager; division of labor; route fidelity; trunk trail; colony size; longevity; methods; mark-recapture technique; sampling; fluorescent marking; marking technique; 
AB  - Mark-recapture sampling must be stratified because populations of foragers and defenders are partitioned by trunk trails and order of emergence respectively.  Foragers and defenders form overlapping subsets of the total colony population, each of which is correlated with total colony population size.  Foragers and defenders have an average life expectancy of approximately 2 weeks.  The fluorescent marking procedure did not significantly affect harvester ant mortality and only temporarily affected their behavior.  Combinations and mixtures of fluorescent ink allow at least.eight groups in a colony to be distinctly marked for periods exceeding 4 months.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and C. D. Jorgensen
TI  - Foragers of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex owyheei: a disposable caste?
SO  - Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 1981;9(4):247-256
MH  - ant; Formicidae; foragers; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Pogonomyrmex salinus; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; workers; caste; biomass; division of labor; age polyethism; longevity; survivorship; total work; behavior; large reservoir; work population; behavior role; methods; mark-recapture technique; 
AB  - Exterior workers of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex owyheei, were subdivided into forager, defender and refuse worker behavior roles (Fig. 2).  Exterior workers comprised approximately 16% of the total colony population with interior workers comprising the remainder.  An average of less than 10% of the total worker population foraged (Table 1).  Studies of role changes confirmed a general one-way progression from interior workers progressed toward foraging, their dry weights declined approximately 40% (Fig. 3) and mandible wear increased (Table 2).  Based on these results, we propose that P. owyheei has evolved a disposable forager strategy that tolerates high forager mortality.  The large reservoir of interior workers required by this strategy may also inhibit the evolution of physically specialized interior worker castes.   (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and C. D. Jorgensen
TI  - Longevity of harvester ant colonies in southern Idaho
SO  - J. Range Manage. 1988;41(2):104-107
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Pogonomyrmex salinas; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; colonies; colony longevity; colony persistence; colony survivorship; mound; clearings; plant community analysis; environmental impact reporting; rangelands; 
AB  - Harvester ant colonies (Pogonomyrmex owyheei Cole) in southern Idaho were monitored periodically for nine-years.  Mortality rates indicate that established colonies live 14-30 years (x = 17).  Mounds were commonly reactivated after the death of an old colony; consequently, some may be utilized for many decades.  Clearings with active mounds showed almost no change after nine years of observations while those without active mounds were rapidly filled by annual herbs and then gradually by perennial shrubs.  Harvester ants are clearly a very persistent component of cold desert shrub communities.    (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and C. D. Jorgensen
TI  - Psammophores: do harvester ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) use these pouches to transport seeds?
SO  - J. Kansas Entomol. Soc. 1990;63(1):138-149
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex occidentalis; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Utah; scientific; feeding behavior; foraging; soil excavation; benefits; missed opportunity; morphology; psammophores; seed transport; 
AB  - Pogonomyrmex ants have a psammophore or basket of long hairs under their heads which they use for carrying loose soil.  The presence of these hairs or ammochaetae improved the carrying ability of Pogonomyrmex occidentalis workers and queens by more than 200% for dry soil but provided no benefit for damp soil.  Foragers readily used their psammophores to collect small seeds and particles of cracked wheat from artificial bait piles.  Psammophores were profitably used with particles up to 0.8 mm3 or about 1.2 mm diameter.  Removal of either the mandibular or subgenal portions of the psammophore significantly  reduced carrying ability but did not completely destroy its function.  Pogonomyrmex workers clearly have the capacity to use their psammophore during foraging and its use could distinctly improve foraging efficiency; nevertheless, foragers apparently  do not use this pouch under natural conditions.  P. occidentalis foragers did not  begin using the psammophore until seed densities were far above normal (> 0.5 per cm2) and full loads were only achieved at extremely high seed densities (> 10 per cm2).  The main problem was that once a forager accepted a food item, no matter how small, it immediately returned directly to the nest without searching for a second item.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter, V. Kumar, L. A. Calcaterra, J. A. Briano and D. R. Seal
TI  - Release and establishment of the little decapitating fly Pseudacteon cultellatus (Diptera: Phoridae) on imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2013;96(4):1567-1573
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polygyny; colonies; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon cultellatus; biocontrol; field release; 
AB  - The little decapitating fly Pseudacteon cultellatus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae) from Argentina was released as a self-sustaining biological control agent against the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida to parasitize small fire ant workers associated with multiple-queen colonies. This fly appears to be established at 2 of 5 release sites, but populations still remain very low (≤ 1% of total Pseudacteon flies) and localized more than 2 yr after their release. Further releases of P. cultellatus in the United States should be limited to a few additional sites in different habitats or climatic regions where this fly might be more successful.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, L. A. Nogueira de Sá, K. Flanders and L. Thompson
TI  - Field releases of the decapitating fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis.  [abstract]
1999;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Oklahoma; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; 
AB  - Phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are a promising group for biological control of fire ants. Maggots of these miniature flies develop in the heads of fire ant workers, decapitating their host upon pupation. Fire ant workers are keenly aware of the presence of phorid flies. The presence of a single fly usually stops or greatly inhibits the foraging efforts of hundreds of workers in only a minute or two.  The overall impact of these flies on fire ant populations is still unknown; however, it is clearly sufficient to have caused the evolution of a number of phorid-specific defense behaviors. These behaviors could only have evolved if Pseudacteon flies had population-level impacts on the survival of fire ant colonies or the production of sexuals.  Our rearing techniques have gradually improved over the past year. Our laboratory is currently producing 800-1800 P. tricuspis flies/day and 100-300 P. curvatus flies/day. We are cooperating with the ARS laboratory in Starkville, MS to develop ways of further automating the process and improving production efficiency. We are particularly positive about our abilities to rear P. curvatus. Once we are able to get this species out of quarantine, we should be able to rear twice as many flies as P. tricuspis with half the effort. Having a steady supply of flies has been the key to our current success in releasing P. tricuspis.  Permits to release P. tricuspis were granted to our lab in 1997. Three releases were conducted in the summer and fall of 1997. Flies have been recovered from one of these sites every month since October 1997, a period of more than 18 months. During this period the flies survived two winters, a flood, and a severe summer drought. Fly populations at this release site still appear to be increasing as evidenced by the numbers of flies observed and the percent of mounds attacked during these observations. These densities are already comparable to those found in South America. It will be very interesting to see if populations continue to grow in the coming year. The growth and persistence of flies at this site is very important because it proves that P. tricuspis can establish self-sustaining and apparently permanent populations on the red imported fire ant in the United States.  During the late summer and fall of 1998, flies were released at six additional sites in Florida (3), Alabama (I), Arkansas (1) and Oklahoma (1). Field-reared flies have been consistently recovered from all three of the Florida sites for the last 5-7 months. Field-reared flies were also recovered from the Arkansas site for two weeks before cold weather set in. Because of the onset of winter, we do not expect to recover flies from the remaining sites until spring 1999. We are currently monitoring fire ant populations at the release sites and paired control sites. We will begin assessing the impacts of phorid flies on fire ant populations in the next year or two after the fly populations have a chance to build up. We will also monitor rates of fly dispersal from the release sites. This information will allow us to determine the value of these flies as fire ant biocontrol agents and how many release sites we will need in each state to achieve maximum benefits in a predetermined amount of time.  Successful releases of these flies and other natural enemies will not eradicate imported fire ants, but they could help tilt the ecological balance in favor of our native ants. If this happens, fire ant populations in the United States could be reduced to levels similar to those in South America..   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, L. A. Nogueira de Sá and L. W. Morrison
TI  - Establishment and dispersal of the fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon tricuspis in North Florida
SO  - Biol. Control 2004;29(2):179-188
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; distribution; mound; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; classical biological control; release site; dispersal; dispersal rates; host preference; establishment; expansion; wind drift; 
AB  - The decapitating  fly Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier was released at eight sites in North Florida between the summer of 1997 and the fall of 1999 as a self-sustaining biocontrol agent of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta.  Several releases used parasitized fire ant workers while most involved adult flies released over disturbed ant mounds.  Establishment and dispersal of fly populations were monitored by disturbing about 10 fire ant mounds at each site and then inspecting them closely for hovering flies over a period of about 30 min.  Overwintering populations of flies were successfully established at 6 of 8 release sites.  Over several years, fly populations at these sites increased to levels as high or higher than those normally seen in their South American homeland.  By the fall of 1999, flies had expanded out 1-6 km from five release sites and occupied about 125 km2.  By the fall of 2000, the five initial release sites plus one new site had fused into one large area about 70 km in diameter.  The flies had expanded out an additional 16-29 km and occupied about 3,300 km2.  By the fall of 2001, the flies had expanded out an additional 10-30 km and occupied approximately 8,100 km2.  Fly dispersal was not related to wind patterns in the Gainesville area.  Based on the above rates of dispersal and an establishment rate of 66%, we estimate that a state the size of Florida would require 5-10 releases spaced over a 3-year period to cover the state in 6-9 years.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, D. H. Oi, S. M. Valles and R. K. Vander Meer
TI  - Mitigating the allergic effects of fire ant envenomation with biologically based population reduction
SO  - Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2013;13(4):372-378
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; Asia; China; Taiwan; Australia; North America; USA; South America; review; sting; venom; impact; medical; hypersensitivity; anaphylaxis; allergens; allergic reaction; population; biocontrol; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; parasite; microsporidium; Kneallhazia solenopsae; virus; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; 
AB  - PURPOSE OF REVIEW:  To describe the current efforts to use biological control agents to reduce fire ant population levels, thus ultimately reducing the number of human sting and allergic reaction incidents.  RECENT FINDINGS:  Climate change and worldwide fire ant expansion will increase the frequency of human encounters and allergenic events, putting additional pressure on the public health sector. Six species of fire ant decapitating flies are now established in the United States. The microsporidium Kneallhazia solenopsae is well established and new fire ant hosts have been identified. The fire ant virus Solenopsis invicta virus 3 shows good potential for use as an environmentally friendly biopesticide because of its virulence and host specificity.  SUMMARY:  During separate founding events in the United States, Australia, mainland China, and Taiwan, fire ants native to South America escaped their native pathogens and parasites. Consequently, fire ant populations in these introduced regions pose a serious public health threat to the human populations by envenomation and subsequent allergic reactions. Specific, self-sustaining biological control agents have been discovered, studied, and released into fire ant populations in the United States in an effort to re-establish an ecological/competitive balance, resulting in reduced fire ant densities and human exposure.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and M. A. Pesquero
TI  - Illustrated key to Pseudacteon decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae) that attack Solenopsis saevissima complex fire ants in South America
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2001;84(4):691-699
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; morphology; female genitalia; taxonomy; key; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; parasites; Phoridae; host parasite relationships; decapitation; biocontrol; oviposition; host decapitation; 
AB  - This paper provides an illustrated key in English and Portuguese to 18 South American species of Pseudacteon decapitating flies that attack Solenopsis fire ants in the saevissima complex.  The taxonomic history and current status of species in the genus Pseudacteon are discussed.  Pseudacteon flies are of interest because of their unusual life history and potential value as classical fire ant biocontrol agents.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, M. A. Pesquero, S. Campiolo and H. G. Fowler
TI  - Growth and development of Pseudacteon phorid fly maggots (Diptera: Phoridae) in the heads of Solenopsis fire ant workers (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1995;24(2):475-479
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; biology; colony; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon wasmanni; maggot; biocontrol; development; larvae; pupae; 
AB  - We studied the growth and development of the parasitic phorid fly P. litoralis Borgmeier in the fire ant S. invicta Buren.  The fly apparently lays one egg in or on the thorax of a major worker.  The newly hatched maggot migrates to the head of the ant where it develops through its last 2 instars in about 3 wk (23 degreesC).  Just before pupation, an enzyme is apparently released that begins dissolving the cuticular membranes of the ant.  The maggot then consumes the entire contents of the ant head, a process that usually results in decapitation of it living host.  After pushing the mouthparts aside, the maggot pupariates within the empty head capsule, positioned so that the anterior 3 segments precisely fill the oral cavity.  The pupal stages lasts about 3 wk.  Results of this study indicate that it should be possible to rear this fly for release as a natural biological control agent of imported fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and R. M. Plowes
TI  - Biology and host specificity of Pseudacteon bifidus a decapitating fly of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata.  [abstract]
2015;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon bifidus; host-pecificity; biocontrol; 
AB  - Pseudacteon bifidus is a small decapitating fly which attacks tropical fire ants (Solenopsis geminata) in Texas. We have been able to rear this fly on tropical fire ants in Florida for more than 10 generations. We are currently investigating its suitability as a self-sustaining biocontrol agent for tropical fire ants in Guam, Hawaii, and the Galapagos.  Recently completed hosts-pecificity tests show that this fly is completely specific to fire ants in the genus Solenopsis.  Food attraction tests show that this fly does not have the potential to become a nuisance pest because it is not attracted to fruits, vegetables, carrion, feces, or various prepared foods.    (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee (s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and R. M. Plowes
TI  - Rearing and biology of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon bifidus (Diptera: Phoridae): a parasitoid of tropical fire ants
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2018;101(2):265-272
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Texas; scientific; workers; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon bifidus; sex ratios; development rates; host preferences; biological control; 
AB  - The small decapitating fly, Pseudacteon bifidus Brown and Morrison (Diptera: Phoridae), is a parasitoid of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata (F.) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). This fly is of interest as a potential self-sustaining biocontrol agent because tropical fire ants are invasive pests throughout the world's tropics, especially on islands of the Pacific. The objective of this study was to develop methods for mass rearing P. bifidus and to study related aspects of its biology. The flies used in this study were collected near the Nueces River north of Catarina, Texas, USA. We found that P. bifidus parasitizes minor workers with an average head width of 0.71 ± 0.10 mm (0.59-1.15, range). The sex ratio of adult flies was moderately skewed to males (58:42%), with males slightly more likely to emerge from the smallest hosts and females from the largest ones. The average generation time was 30 d at 27.6 °C. Average larval development time was 14 d at 27.6 °C, but the pattern was highly skewed with a mode of 11 d and about 15% of individuals in a long tail of slow developing larvae, which extended out to at least 41 d. Male pupae emerged faster than female pupae (0.8 d, 23.5 °C). Unlike other Pseudacteon species, adult females were not ready to oviposit until 8 to 24 h after eclosure. We were able to rear 9,500 ± 2,800 flies per generation primarily by modifying preexisting rearing procedures (1) to provide adults access to water and sugar water so they could live longer, (2) by extending access to hosts for 1 to 2 extra d, and (3) by avoiding reuse of host colonies with poor rates of parasitism. Labor costs were decreased by rearing in discrete generations and the use of an attack box with automatic temperature, humidity, lighting, and mechanical controls that allowed flies to emerge, mate, and parasitize hosts without the need for constant management. The success of these rearing efforts provided a foundation for subsequent studies of P. bifidus host specificity and host suitability.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, R. M. Plowes and C. Causton
TI  - The fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon bifidus (Diptera: Phoridae): Host specificity and attraction to potential food items
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2018;101(1):55-60
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Camponotus floridanus; Crematogaster laeviuscula; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Nylanderia fulva; Odontomachus brunneus; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole floridana; Pogonomyrmex badius; Solenopsis aurea; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Tetramorium bicarinatum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; California; Florida; Texas; scientific; distribution; host range; symbiont; myrmecophile; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon bifidus; Pseudacteon catarinae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon hippeus; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon obtusus; diet preferences; biological control; 
AB  - The tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata (F.) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), is an invasive pest throughout most of the tropics, especially on islands in the Pacific. Natural enemies such as the fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon bifidus Brown and Morrison (Diptera: Phoridae), offer the potential for use as self-sustaining biological control agents provided they are host specific and do not cause other unintended problems. This paper provides details of sequential field and laboratory choice tests with host and non-host ants, as well as tests with a variety of potential food items to which adult flies may be attracted. Results of these tests showed that P. bifidus flies are highly host specific to tropical fire ants and that they are not attracted to ants in other genera. Even other species of fire ants are unlikely to be parasitized by this fly in the field. Furthermore, tests with a variety of food items demonstrated that P. bifidus is not likely to be a nuisance to humans because it is not attracted to carrion, feces, fruits, or various kinds of human food items. In short, P. bifidus would not likely cause unintended problems if it were used as a self-sustaining biological control agent of invasive tropical fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Solenopsis aurea collected in California.  Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier, P. nocens Borgmeier, P. obtusus Borgmeier attacking S. invicta colonies in Texas.  Nylanderia fulva incorrectly listed as a Dolichoderinae; it is a Formicinae.]
AU  - S. D. Porter and D. A. Savignano
TI  - Invasion of polygyne fire ants decimates native ants and disrupts arthropod community
SO  - Ecology 1990;71(6):2095-2106
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster texana; Atta texana; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus americanus; Camponotus texanus; Conomyrma pyramicus flava; Crematogaster laeviuscula; Crematogaster punctulata; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Forelius foetida; Formica pallidefulva; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypoponera opacior; Leptogenys elongata; Monomorium minimum; Myrmecina americana; Neivamyrmex texanus; Pachycondyla harpax; Paratrechina terricola; Pheidole bicarinata; Pheidole casta; Pheidole constipata; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole hyatti; Pheidole lamia; Pheidole metallescens; Pogonomyrmex barbatus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Strumigenys silvestrii; Trachymyrmex turrifex; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; population; interspecific interactions; community; nests; behavior; ant abundance; biodiversity; competition; diversity; exotic species; foraging intensity; invasion; polygyny; species richness; bait; pitfall; 
AB  - The fire ant, S. invicta Buren, invaded southeastern United States from South America more than 50 years ago.  Urban and agricultural consequences of this invasion are well documented; however, ecological effects are still poorly understood.  Increasing frequencies of 'polygyne' or multiple-queen fire ants in Texas and other areas of the Southeast are disturbing because nest densities of this new form are often ten times greater than those of the more familiar monogyne form.  We studied the ecological impacts of a polygyne fire ant invasion on ants and other surface-active arthropods at a field station in central Texas.  Arthropod abundance and species richness were assessed using a combination of baits, pitfall traps, and litter samples.  This invasion decimated the indigenous ant fauna.  Competitive replacement appears to be the primary mechanism behind this effect.  Species richness of ants in infested areas dropped by 70%, while the total number of native individuals dropped by 90%.  Of 35 species of ants collected in this study, 23 were either significantly less common or absent from infested sites; only S. invicta was more common at infested sites.  The most dramatic effect of the invasion was a 10-30 fold increase in the total number of ants at infested sitesof which >99% were the imported fire ant S. invicta.  The impact of this invasion on other surface-active arthropods was less severe, but still substantial. The abundance of isopods, erythraeid mites, and tumblebug scarabs declined significantly, while the abundance of ground crickets, a brachypterous roach, and a symbiotic scarab increased significantly.  Overall, the species richness of non-ant arthropods was 30% lower in infested sites and individual numbers were 75% lower.  Total arthropod species richness (including ants) was 40% less at infested sites.  These data indicate that polygyne fire ants pose a substantial threat to the biodiversity of native arthropod communities.    (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and W. R. Tschinkel
TI  - Population dynamics of harvester ant workers (Pogonomyrmex).  [Abstract]
SO  - The biology of social insects. Proceedings of the Ninth Congress of the IUSSI, Boulder, Colorado, August, 1982 1982:67
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; caste; worker activity patterns; interior work; exterior work; population; mortality rates; behavior; 

AU  - S. D. Porter and W. R. Tschinkel
TI  - Fire ant polymorphism (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): factors affecting worker size
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1985;78(3):381-386
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; size; brood; growth; diet; worker size; polymorphism; caste; homeostasis; caste regulation; 
AB  - Worker size distributions are apparently not homeostatically regulated in colonies of the fire ant S. invicta Buren.  Pupae produced in artificially composed polymorphic, dimorphic, and small-worker colonies were not significantly different in either average size or frequency distributions.  However, larger colonies produced significantly larger pupae.  Average pupal size was tightly correlated with the logarithm of colony size all the way from single founding queens up to mature colonies with tens of thousands of workers.  High larval density also resulted in significantly smaller pupae.  The apparent lack of homeostatic control combined with the influences of colony size and larval density, suggest that fire ant caste distributions do not track short-term environmental contingencies.  Nevertheless, the general relationship between worker size and colony size is almost certainly adaptive.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and W. R. Tschinkel
TI  - Fire ant polymorphism: the ergonomics of brood production
SO  - Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 1985;16(4):323-336
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polymorphism; ecology; behavior; bioenergetics; colony growth; worker caste distribution; worker longevity; physiology; respiration; invasive species; 
AB  - Social organization is generally assumed to increase colony efficiency and survival; however, little quantitative information is available to support this assumption.  Polymorphism is an important aspect of labor division in colonies of the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. Our objective was to investigate the effect of fire ant polymorphism on brood production efficiency.  We set up standardized polymorphic colonies that contained only small, medium, or large workers respectively.  Polymorphic colonies produced brood at about the same rate as colonies composed of only small workers.  Colonies composed of only medium workers produced about 30% less brood, and colonies composed of only large workers produced little or no brood at all.  This pattern was independent of colony size; however, smaller colonies (0.75 g, live weight) produced almost twice as much brood per gram of workers as larger colonies (3.0 g.).  Additional experiments revealed that the size of workers in the artificial monomorphic colonies affected all stages of brood rearing.  Large workers not only inhibited the development of early and late instar larvae, but also reduced the queen's oviposition rate.  Brood production efficiency on an energetic basis was determined by dividing the grams of brood produced per unit time by the energetic costs expended for the maintenance and production of each worker size class.  Worker maintenance costs were estimated from respiration, while production costs were determined from the coloric content of worker tissue divided by their average longevity.  Worker respiration per milligram body weight decreased about 40% as body size increased.  Large workers lived about 50% longer than small workers and contained 9% more energy per milligram of tissue.  Energetic efficiency in polymorphic colonies was approximately 10% higher than in colonies composed of only small workers.  In other words, when food supplies are limiting, polymorphism may offer a slight advantage in brood production.   (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and W. R. Tschinkel
TI  - Adaptive value of nanitic workers in newly founded red imported fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1986;79(4):723-726
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; caste; colony founding; nanitic workers; evolution; ergonomics; 
AB  - Nanitics are miniature workers reared by the founding queens of many ant species.  Founding fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta Buren) with nanitic workers produced 17% more brood than experimentally modified colonies containing equal weights of normal-sized minor workers.  As predicted, the number of workers in our founding colonies, not worker size, was the principal factor influencing brood production.  These results provide the first empirical evidence substantiating the hypothesis that nanitic workers are indeed adaptive.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and W. R. Tschinkel
TI  - Foraging in Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): effects of weather and season
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1987;16(3):802-808
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; foraging; temperature; humidity; weather; season; foraging rate; activity; soil moisture; soil temperature; 
AB  - Foraging activity of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, was monitored at bait traps for 1 year to determine how weather and season affected foraging.  Soil temperature at 2 cm was the best individual predictor of foraging rates at our study site (R2  = 59%); workers foraged from 15 to 43°C, with maximal rates between 22 and 36°C.  Season explained another 19% of sample variation in a multiple regression with soil temperature; this was because foraging was unusually low in late fall.  Rain reduced foraging rates by ca. 40% and explained an additional 3% of the variation.  Workers did not exhibit a tendency to forage more at night because neither time of day nor night/day were significantly correlated with foraging.  Average weight of individual foragers increased ca. 30% with increasing soil temperature and decreased 15% with the advancing season.  Soil-temperature data were used to calculate periods of foraging activity for an open pasture, a nearby shaded woodlot, and seven additional locations in the southeastern United States.  Activity  periods were distinctly shorter in shady habitats and higher latitudes.   Low temperatures limited activity much more frequently than high temperatures.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter and W. R. Tschinkel
TI  - Fire ant thermal preferences: behavioral control of growth and metabolism
SO  - Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 1993;32(5):321-329
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; bioenergetics; thermoregulation; thermal regulation; temperature preference; food limitation; thermal optima; hunger; behavior; brood tending; 
AB  - Thermal preferences of well-fed and food-limited fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) were studied in relation to colony growth and metabolic costs.  The growth curve for well-fed colonies was strongly skewed toward warmer temperatures with maximal growth occurring near 32°C (Fig. 2A).  The growth curve for food-limited colonies was skewed toward cooler temperatures with maximal colony size occurring around 25°C (Fig. 2B).  Food-limited colonies apparently grew larger at cooler temperatures because metabolic costs of workers were reduced.  A series of binary choice tests confirmed three predictions concerning fire ant thermal preferences (Fig. 3-4): First, well-fed colonies preferred brood temperatures very near the optimum for colony growth (31°C versus 32°C).  Colonies were also able to select appropriate suboptimal growth temperatures when the optimal range was unavailable.  Secondly, as predicted, a large percentage of colony workers (≈30% in well-fed colonies) consistently chose cooler temperatures than those selected for the brood.  This strategy probably increases longevity of workers not directly associated with brood care.  Thirdly, food-limited colonies preferred cooler temperatures than well-fed colonies.  Metabolic costs of food-limited colonies were reduced by approximately 7% because of (1) slightly cooler brood temperatures (30°C versus 31°C) and because (2) an additional 20-30% of the workers selected cooler temperatures.  The addition of excess food reversed food-limited thermal preferences within 12 h for the brood (Fig. 5) and several days for the workers.  Contrary to expectations, thermal preferences for brood in food-limited colonies did not match the food-limited growth curve, perhaps because fire ant colonies can choose to rear brood at warm temperatures while maintaining accumulated colony biomass at cooler temperatures.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles, T. S. Davis, J. A. Briano, L. A. Calcaterra, D. H. Oi and A. Jenkins
TI  - Host range of the microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invictae at three field sites in Argentina.  [abstract]
2005;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; PCR screening procedure; host range; microsporidia; pathogen; Vairimorpha invictae; 
AB  - The microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invictae is being evaluated for possible release in the United States as a potential classical or self-sustaining biological control agent for imported fire ants. We examined the host range of this pathogen in northern Argentina by collecting ants and other arthropods from three sites where Solenopsis invicta fire ant colonies had high levels of infection (28-83%). We examined 235 nonant arthropods from 10 orders, 43 families, and more than 80 species with a PCR screening procedure; none were infected with V. invictae. We also examined 509 non-Solenopsis ants from 12 genera, 19 species, and 61 baits using the same PCR screening procedure; again, none were infected with V. invictae. These data indicate that, in its native South American range, V. invictae is specific to Solenopsis fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles, T. S. Davis, J. A. Briano, L. A. Calcaterra, D. H. Oi and R. A. Jenkins
TI  - Host specificity of the microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invictae at five field sites with infected Solenopsis invicta fire ant colonies in northern Argentina
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2007;90(3):447-452
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Ectatomma; Linepithema; Paratrechina; Pheidole; Solenopsis invicta; Wasmannia; Zacryptocerus; Dolichoderinae; Ectatomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; colonies; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Vairimorpha invictae; entomopathogenic protozoa; host range; host specificity; disease prevalence; microsporidiosis; biocontrol agents; methods; polymerase chain reaction-based screening procedure; 
AB  - The microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invictae is being evaluated for release in the United States as a potential self-sustaining biological control agent for imported fire ants. We examined the host range of this pathogen at 5 sites in northern Argentina where Solenopsis invicta Buren fire ant colonies had high levels of infection (28-83%). At 3 sites near the city of Corrientes, we examined 509 non-Solenopsis ants from 61 collections, 12 genera, and 19 species with a polymerase chain reaction-based screening procedure. No V. invictae infections were detected in any of the samples. At 2 sites near San Javier in Santa Fe Province, 350 km to the south, we screened another 438 non-Solenopsis ants from 44 baits, 4 genera, and 4 species, again with no infections. At the Corrientes sites, we also examined 235 non-ant arthropods from 10 orders, 43 families, and more than 80 species. None were infected with V. invictae. The results of this study indicate that, in its native South American range, V. invictae is specific to Solenopsis fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles and J. M. Gavilanez-Slone
TI  - Long-term efficacy of two cricket and two liver diets for rearing laboratory fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis invicta)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2015;98(3):991-993
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; diet; laboratory diet; laboratory rearing; liver; raw chicken meat; sugars; beef; Gryllidae; 
AB  - Fire ant colonies thrived on diets of sugar water and either raw beef liver or raw chicken liver for almost 8 mo, after which brood production ceased in half of these colonies. As expected, colonies did well on a diet of sugar water and domestic crickets. Unexpectedly, however, banded crickets were much less suitable than either liver or domestic crickets.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles and D. H. Oi
TI  - Host specificity and colony impacts of the fire ant pathogen, Solenopsis invicta virus 3
SO  - J. Invertebr. Pathol. 2013;114(1):1-6
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; scientific; pathogens; biopesticides; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; positive-strand RNA virus; Picornavirales; Red imported fire ant; biocontrol; 
AB  - An understanding of host specificity is essential before pathogens can be used as biopesticides or self-sustaining biocontrol agents. In order to define the host range of the recently discovered Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3), we exposed laboratory colonies of 19 species of ants in 14 genera and 4 subfamilies to this virus. Despite extreme exposure during these tests, active, replicating infections only occurred in Solenopsis invicta Buren and hybrid (S. invicta x S. richteri) fire ant colonies. The lack of infections in test Solenopsis geminata fire ants from the United States indicates that SINV-3 is restricted to the saevissima complex of South American fire ants, especially since replicating virus was also found in several field-collected samples of the black imported fire ant, Solenopsis richteri Forel. S. invicta colonies infected with SINV-3 declined dramatically with average brood reductions of 85% or more while colonies of other species exposed to virus remained uninfected and healthy. The combination of high virulence and high host specificity suggest that SINV-3 has the potential for use as either a biopesticide or a self-sustaining biocontrol agent.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles and R. M. Pereira
TI  - Scavenging crickets (Orthoptera: Gryllidae) transmit Solenopsis invicta virus 3 to red imported fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) colonies
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2016;99(4):811-812
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; inter-colony transmission; host-specificity tests; biocontrol; house cricket; Acheta domesticus; 
AB  - This study demonstrated that Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) can be mechanically transmitted among colonies of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) by scavengers like the house cricket (Orthoptera: Gryllidae), which readily eat dead infected fire ant workers without becoming infected themselves.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, S. M. Valles, A. L. Wild, R. Dieckmann and N. J. R. Plowes
TI  - Solenopsis invicta virus 3: Further host-specificity tests with native Solenopsis ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2015;98(1):122-125
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis aurea; Solenopsis carolinensis; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis molesta; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Arizona; California; Florida; Illinois; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; host-specificity tests; biocontrol; host range; thief ant; native fire ant; 
AB  - A thorough understanding of host specificity is essential before pathogens can be used as biopesticides or self-sustaining biocontrol agents. In order to better define the host range of Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3), we collected and exposed colonies of 2 native fire ants (Solenopsis aurea Wheeler, Solenopsis xyloni McCook) and 2 native thief ants (Solenopsis carolinensis Forel, Solenopsis molesta [Say]) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) to the SINV-3 virus. Despite extreme exposure to the virus, active, replicating infections resulted only in colonies of the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta Buren). These results, combined with a previous study of ants from 13 other genera, strongly support the proposition that the SINV-3 virus can be used safely as either a biopesticide or a self-sustaining biocontrol agent in parts of California, the Caribbean, and other regions of the world where this virus does yet not occur.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, B. Van Eimeren and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Invasion of red imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): microgeography of competitive replacement
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1988;81(6):913-918
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; colony founding; ecology; distribution; interspecific interactions; competition; aggression; 
AB  - The invasion of Brackenridge Field Laboratory, Austin, Texas by the multiple-queen form of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, was monitored for 3 yr.  This invasion provides a rare glimpse of competitive replacement in progress.  It has been remarkable for two reasons.  First, imported fire ant colonies replaced colonies of the native fire ant, S. geminata (F.). at a rate of 6:1, including a radical restructuring of the arthropod community rather than a simple one-for-one substitution of an equivalent species.  Secondly, the invasion proceeded at a very slow rate (about 35m/yr) along a continous front in a pattern best explained by colony budding and considerable biotic resistance from the native ant community.  These data indicate that the invasion process may continue at the local level for years or even decades after the passage of the main invasion front.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - S. D. Porter, R. K. Vander Meer, M. A. Pesquero, S. Campiolo and H. G. Fowler
TI  - Solenopsis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) fire ant reactions to attacks of Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae) in Southeastern Brazil
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1995;88(4):570-575
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Camponotus; Ectatomma; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Ectatomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; biology; oviposition; colony; behavior; foraging; aggression; defensive; defense responses; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon nr. tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; defense responses; parasitic flies; 
AB  - We studied the responses of Solenopsis fire ants to Pseudacteon phorid fly attacks in southeastern Brazil.  The presence of these phorid parasites triggered a suite of phorid-specific defense responses including reduced foraging, bait guarding, a curled defensive posture, and general colony immobility.  The existence of these phorid-specific defenses indicates that Pseudacteon phorids exert substantial evolutionary pressure on South American fire ant populations.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, D. F. Williams and R. S. Patterson
TI  - Factors affecting the relative densities of fire ants in North and South America.  [abstract]
1993;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; Brazil; scientific; populations; relative densities; baits; 

AU  - S. D. Porter, D. F. Williams and R. S. Patterson
TI  - Rearing the decapitating fly Pseudacteon tricuspis (Diptera: Phoridae) in imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis) from the United States
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1997;90(1):135-138
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; South America; Argentina; scientific; life cycle; behavior; host parasite relationships; decapitation; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; importation; rearing; 
AB  - The South American phorid fly Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier was imported into quarantine facilities in Gainesville, FL, to study its life history and determine if it could be reared on imported fire ant workers from North America.  We found that this fly developed successfully on Solenopsis invicta Buren workers from Florida and hybrid Solenopsis richteri  Forel X S. invicta fire ants from Mississippi.  It also was reared on S. richteri and S. invicta  fire ants from Argentina.  This fly, like its congener Pseudacteon litoralis Borgmeier, had the peculiar habit of decapitating its living host and using the ant's empty head capsule as its pupal case.  We were able to rear this fly through 1 complete generation in the laboratory, indicating that mass rearing for inoculative releases in the United States may be possible.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter, D. F. Williams, R. S. Patterson and H. G. Fowler
TI  - Intercontinental differences in the abundance of Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): an escape from natural enemies?
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 1997;26(2):373-384
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis pythia; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; Puerto Rico; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Texas; South America; Argentina; Brazil; Paraguay; scientific; polygyny; season; temperature; climate; climatic factors; precipitation; distribution; occurrence; population; mound size; mound density; habitat; invasion; biocontrol; bait; sampling; 
AB  - The absence of natural enemies often allows exotic pests to reach densities that are much higher than normally occur in their native habitats.  When Solenopsis fire ants were introduced into the United States, their numerous natural enemies were left behind in South America.  To compare intercontinental fire ant densities, we selected 13 areas in South America and another 12 areas in North America.  Sample areas were paired with weather stations and distributed across a broad range of climatic conditions.  In each area, we measured fire ant densities at 5 preselected roadside sites that were at least 5 km apart.  At each site, we also measured foraging activity, checked for polygyne colonies, and recorded various kinds of environmental data.  In most areas, we also measured fire ant densities in lawns and grazing land.  Fire ant populations along roadsides in North America were 4-7 times higher than fire ant populations in South America.  Similar intercontinental differences were found in lawns and on grazing lands.  These intercontinental differences in fire ant abundance were not associated with sampling conditions, seasonal variability, habitat differences, or the frequency of polygyny.  Although several correlations were found with long-term weather conditions, careful inspection of the data suggests that these correlations were probably more coincidental than causal.  Cultural differences in roadside maintenance may explain some of the intercontinental differences in fire ant abundance, but they did not account for equivalent intercontinental differences in grazing land and mowed lawns.  Bait tests showed that competition with other ants was much more important in South America; however, we were not able to determine whether this was a major cause of intercontinental differences or largely a consequence of other factors such as the numerous pathogens and parasites that are found in South America.  Because this study was correlational, we were unable to determine the cause(s) of the large intercontinental difference in fire ant abundance that we observed.  However, we were able to largely exclude a number of possible explanations for the differences, including sampling, season, polygyny, climate, and aspects of habitat.  By a process of  elimination, escape from natural enemies remains among the most likely explanations for the unusually high densities of fire ants found in North America.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. D. Porter and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - The FORMIS ant Bibliography:  A window on the world's ant literature and a door into myrmecology's future.  [abstract]
SO  - The golden jubilee proceedings.  Proceedings of the XIV International Congress of IUSSI, 27 July - 3 August 2002, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 2002:88
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; scientific; bibliography; 

AU  - J. Resasco, S. D. Porter, N. J. Sanders and D. J. Levey
TI  - Assessing the effects of sodium on fire ant foraging in the field and colony growth in the laboratory
SO  - Ecol. Entomol. 2014;39(2):267-271
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; colony growth; physiology; NaCl; salt limitation; anthropogenic activities; baits; environmental impact; foraging; population growth; sodium; sodium chloride; 
AB  - Sodium is an essential dietary element and preferential foraging for high concentrations of sodium by inland herbivorous and omnivorous ants suggests it may be limiting. If so, increased sodium availability through altered deposition and anthropogenic sources may lead to increased colony and population growth and cascading ecological impacts.  For red imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren, the present study tests: (i) whether colonies from coastal and inland sites differ in their responses to NaCl baits; and (ii) whether supplemental NaCl increases growth of fire ant colonies in the laboratory.  Fire ants in inland sites with low sodium deposition responded roughly an order of magnitude more strongly to high concentrations of NaCl baits than did fire ants in coastal sites with high sodium deposition.  Laboratory colonies of fire ants, however, showed no signs of sodium limitation or benefits of increased sodium. The link between behavioral responses to baits in the field and effects on colony growth deserves further investigation to assess the ecological impacts of altered sodium availability.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. A. Schreiber, C. P. Hansen, M. A. Rumble, J. J. Millspaugh, R. S. Gamo, J. W. Kehmeier and N. Wojcik
TI  - Microhabitat selection of brood-rearing sites by Greater Sage-Grouse in Carbon County, Wyoming
SO  - West. N. Am. Natur. 2015;75(3):348-363
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Wyoming; scientific; predator; myrmecophagy; bird; Greater Sage-Grouse; Centrocercus urophasianus; brood rearing; canopy; carbon; chicks; females; food availability; forbs; global positioning systems; logit analysis; microhabitats; plant communities; probability; vegetation types; wind power; 
AB  - Declines in Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus, hereafter sage-grouse) populations could be attributed to low chick survival, which may be influenced by the availability of food and cover at sites used by females rearing broods. Habitat attributes important to broods may vary regionally; thus, it is necessary to understand factors affecting regional sage-grouse brood-rearing site selection, especially when estimating the impacts of development. We monitored brood-rearing female sage-grouse equipped with solar Argos Global Positioning System Platform Transmitter Terminals from 2011 to 2013 to assess microhabitat selection by broods in Carbon County, Wyoming. We measured vegetation and arthropod characteristics at diurnal sites used by broods (n = 42 in 2011, n = 31 in 2012, n = 32 in 2013) and at 3 paired-random sites associated with each used site (n = 315), located 50 m, 250 m, and 500 m from the used site. We fit conditional logistic models within an information-theoretic framework to identify vegetation and arthropod characteristics associated with microsite selection of brood-rearing sites. Sage-grouse selected brood-rearing sites with greater visual obstruction (0-45.7 cm in height), higher numbers of arthropods in the order Diptera, and lower numbers of arthropods in the order Coleoptera. There was an interaction effect between the number of arthropods in the order Hymenoptera and the canopy cover of broad-leaf forbs; the relative probability of selection increased with increasing number of Hymenoptera when there was low cover (<20%) of broad-leaf forbs, but decreased with increasing number of Hymenoptera when there was high broad-leaf forb cover (>20%). We also found a quadratic relationship between selection of brood-rearing sites and total vegetation canopy cover; the relative probability of selection increased until approximately 75% cover and then decreased with increasing cover. Sage-grouse rearing broods selected a diverse array of vegetation types, but greatest use occurred within mesic communities. Our results could be used to identify vegetation communities with high relative probabilities of use by sage-grouse rearing broods, which will help guide management decisions and provide reference conditions for future research that evaluates the effects of wind energy development on sage-grouse.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Pogonomyrmex spp. harvester ants, one the most common species of Hymenoptera on our study area, are associated with sandy soils in arid environments. ]
AU  - S. O. Shattuck, S. D. Porter and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Solenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 (Insecta, Hymenoptera): proposed conservation of the specific name
SO  - Bull. Zool. Nomencl. 1999;56(1):27-30
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima wagneri; Solenopsis wagneri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; scientific; nomenclature; taxonomy; 
AB  - The purpose of this application is to conserve the specific name of the ant Solenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 (Formicidae).  This ant is a well-known imported pest in the southeastern United States and Puerto Rico.  The name is threatened by the poorly understood and little used senior subjective synonym S. wagneri Santschi, 1916.   This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.          *[S. wagneri has been supressed in favor of S. invicta, Anon. 2001.]
AU  - Q. H. Shi, L. Hu, W. K. Wang, R. K. Vander Meer, S. D. Porter and L. Chen
TI  - Workers and alate queens of Solenopsis geminata share qualitatively similar but quantitatively different venom alkaloid chemistry
SO  - Front. Ecol. Evol. 2015;3: 76:9 p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; workers; alate queens; chemistry; venom; alkaloids; piperidine; GC-MS; isomer; cis-2-methyl-6-n-undecylpiperidines; trans-2-methyl-6-n-undecylpiperidines; 
AB  - Solenopsis geminata group (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) encompasses ant species commonly called fire ants because of their painful sting. The many physiological effects of the venom are caused by 2-methyl-6-alkyl and/or alkenylpiperidine alkaloids. The variation in piperidine alkaloid structures has useful taxonomic characters. The most well studied Solenopsis species is Solenopsis invicta, which was accidentally imported into the USA in the 1930s from South America. It quickly spread throughout the southern USA and is now a major invasive pest ant in the USA and in other parts of the world.  Interestingly, the invasive S. invicta has largely displaced a native USA fire ant, S. geminata, from the southern USA. We explore the possibility that differences in venom chemistry could be correlated with this displacement. The cis and trans alkaloids from body extracts of workers and alate queens of S. geminata were separated by silica gel chromatography, identified, and quantitated by GC-MS analysis. Both workers and alate queens produce primarily cis- and trans-2-methyl-6-n-undecylpiperidines, as well as other minor alkaloid components. Imported fire ant, S. invicta, alate queens produce the same alkaloids as S. geminata alate queens, but in contrast S. invicta workers produce piperidine alkaloids with longer side chains, which are purported to be physiologically more effective. These results are discussed in relation to the evolutionary progression of fire ant venom alkaloids and displacement of S. geminata by S. invicta in the USA.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. R. d. Souza, C. d. B. Munhae, C. M. Kamura, N. d. S. Portero and M. S. d. C. Morini
TI  - Formigas em áreas urbanizadas da Serra do Itapeti
SO  - Serra do Itapeti: aspectos históricos, sociais e naturalísticos 2012:301-310
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex crassispinus; Acromyrmex disciger; Acromyrmex niger; Anochetus altisquamis; Apterostigma; Atta sexdens; Brachymyrmex heeri; Brachymyrmex incisus; Brachymyrmex luederwaldti; Brachymyrmex pictus; Camponotus atriceps; Camponotus crassus; Camponotus (Myrmaphaenus) novogranadensis; Camponotus rufipes; Camponotus; Camponotus (Myrmaphaenus); Camponotus (Tanaemyrmex); Cephalotes; Crematogaster (Orthocrema); Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Ectatomma brunneum; Ectatomma edendatum; Gnamptogenys striatula; Gnamptogenys; Hypoponera; Labidus praedator; Leptothorax; Linepithema iniquum; Linepithema neotropicum; Megalomyrmex; Monomorium pharaonis; Mycetarotes parallelus; Mycetosoritis; Myrmelachista bettinae; Myrmelachista ruszkii; Nylanderia fulva; Odontomachus affinis; Odontomachus chelifer; Odontomachus meinerti; Oxyepoecus; Pachycondyla striata; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheidole; Pogonomyrmex; Procryptocerus pr. schmalzi; Pseudomyrmex gracilis; Pseudomyrmex pallidus; Pseudomyrmex phyllophylus; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis; Strumigenys schmalzi; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis) gp.; Typhlomyrmex rogennoferi; Wasmannia auropunctata; Wasmannia; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Ectatomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; distribution; diversity; impact; urban; houses; pitfall traps; hand collecting; 
AB  - *[Camponotus (Tanaemyrmex) misspelled Camponotus (Taemyrmex); Labidus praedator misspelled Labidus praedador; Oxyepoecus misspelled Oxypoecus; Strumigenys schmalzi misspelled Strumygenys schmalzi; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis) gp. misspelled Trachymyrmex septentrionales) gp.; Typhlomyrmex rogennoferi misspelled Thypholomyrmex rogennoferi.]
AU  - L. E. Tennant and S. D. Porter
TI  - Comparison of diets of two fire ant species (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): solid and liquid components
SO  - J. Entomol. Sci. 1991;26(4):450-465
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; diet; polygyny; foraging success; tending Hemiptera; liquid food; solid food; carbohydrate; sugar; plant nectar; trophic level; 
AB  - Diets of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, and the native fire ant, Solenopsis geminata [F.], were studied in adjacent field colonies in south central Texas.  A comparison of solid food diets of the two species revealed a 59% overlap of identifiable arthropods and other solid food matter.  The major difference was that S. geminata collected eight times more seeds than did S. invicta.  Both species collected liquid food much more frequently than solid food; in fact, an average of 70-80% of successful foragers returned with liquid.  Rates of liquid collection were approximately 40% higher for S. invicta than for S. geminata.  Foraging rates fluctuated with season but the percent of successful foragers returning with liquid remained relatively constant.  Plants and honeydew producing homopterans are the most probable sources of this liquid based on sugar and amino acid analyses of S. invicta foragers.  Use of liquid carbohydrate energy sources helps explain how fire ant colonies can collect sufficient food to sustain extremely dense field populations.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. Thompson, M. Korzukhin and S. D. Porter
TI  - Modeling fire ant range expansion
1998;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Arkansas; scientific; range extension; model; 

AU  - L. Thompson, M. Korzukhin and S. D. Porter
TI  - Modeling potential RIFA range expansion in the United States
1999;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; distribution; expansion; invasive species; model; 

AU  - L. C. Thompson, M. Korzukhin and S. Porter
TI  - Cold winter of 2000-01 drastically reduces red imported fire ant populations in southern Arkansas: using a model to verify what was perceived
2002;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Arkansas; scientific; temperature; season; winter kill; populations; model; 
AB  - The winter of 2000-2001 in Arkansas was especially cold and wet.  During the subsequent spring of 2001, it was observed that red imported fire ant populations in the state had been reduced substantially from those of 2000.  Although the exact cause of the population reduction is unknown, it is believed that the combination of cold and saturated soils was responsible.  Theoretically, saturated soils keep fire ants above the water-line and close to the soil surface where they will be vulnerable to cold temperatures.  To evaluate this thesis, we obtained max/min weather data for 54 Arkansas weather stations for the years 2000 and 2001.   Weather is an important variable in our computer model (Korzukhin et al. 2001) where cold induced mortality is one of the factors influencing population dynamics.  The analysis showed that our model was not very good at predicting colony mortality, but it did predict worker ant mortality reasonably well.  Thus, our model probably needs to be adjusted to reflect the influence that high water tables might have on RIFA susceptibility to cold weather.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - L. C. Thompson, S. D. Porter and M. D. Korzukhin
TI  - The model analysis of the potential temperature-dependent range for the red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta in the United States.  [in Russian]
SO  - Prob. Ecol. Monit. Ecosyst. Model. 2000;27:275-286
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; model analysis; potential temperature-dependent range; 

AU  - L. C. Thompson, S. Wiley, M. Korzukhin and S. Porter
TI  - Best timing for one application of amdro® bait for red imported fire ant control in the southern U.S.
2002;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; scientific; temperature; season; chemical control; model; 
AB  - Insecticide baits are very effective in reducing populations of the red imported fire ant.  Research using a computer model of red imported fire ant population dynamics (Korzukhin et al. 20011, showed that 2 to 4 applications may be needed to maintain fire ant populations at very low levels, with 1 to 3 applications needed to keep ants at moderate levels (Wiley et al. 2000).  If the number of applications needed is partially answered, the next question to be asked is when is the best time to apply a bait to maximize long term control.  Because our model follows the growth of each colony and its interaction with up to 500 neighboring colonies, conducting model runs to study this question is best done with a fast computer and lots of memory.  Unfortunately, time and technology limitations only ailowed us to model scenarios for one application per year.  The results showed that either September or October is a good time if one is making only one bait application of Amdro per year. In the deep South, November would also be fine.  As we get more time, scenarios with 2,3, and 4 applications wiIl be conducted.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - W. R. Tschinkel and S. D. Porter
TI  - Efficiency of sperm use in queens of the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1988;81(5):777-781
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; mating; colony size; growth; season; reproduction; spermatozoa; spermatheca; 
AB  - Like most social Hymenoptera, queens of the fire ant, S. invicta Buren, mate only at the beginning of their reproductive lives.  They receive an initial supply of about 7 million sperm which they gradually parcel out over a period of almost 7 yr until the supply is exhausted and they can no longer produce female offspring.  Using the monogynous form of the fire ant, efficiency of sperm use was determined directly by allowing four newly mated queens to rear approximately 0.5 million workers.  The mean sperm count of these queens declined by 1.7 million from the starting value, yielding an efficiency of 3.2 sperm per adult female offspring.  Sperm-use efficiency was also determined indirectly for field queens based on calculations that show these queens expend 7.0 million sperm to produce 2.6 million workers for an efficiency of about 2.6 sperm per adult female.  Lifetime worker production was calculated from annual estimates of colony growth and worker turnover.  These estimates of fire ant sperm-use efficiency are about 10 times higher than those reported for honey bee queens and astronomically higher than those of most nonsocial animals.  Apparently, efficient use of sperm is an important reproductive capability for S. invicta and other social insects with high reproductive outputs.  (abstract provided by author)
AU  - K. Vail, L. Davis, D. Wojcik, P. Koehler and D. Williams
TI  - Structure-invading ants of Florida
1994;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus abdominalis floridanus; Camponotus castaneus; Camponotus decipiens; Camponotus nearcticus; Camponotus pennsylvanicus; Camponotus planatus; Camponotus tortuganus; Conomyrma bossuta; Conomyrma bureni; Conomyrma elegans; Conomyrma flavopecta; Conomyrma grandula; Conomyrma reginicula; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex bossuta; Dorymyrmex bureni; Dorymyrmex elegans; Dorymyrmex flavopecta; Dorymyrmex grandula; Dorymyrmex reginicula; Forelius pruinosus; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypoponera punctatissima; Iridomyrmex humilis; Linepithema humile; Monomorium destructor; Monomorium floricola; Monomorium pharaonis; Monomorium trageri; Paratrechina bourbonica; Paratrechina concinna; Paratrechina guatemalensis; Paratrechina longicornis; Paratrechina phantasma; Paratrechina pubens; Paratrechina wojciki; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole megacephala; Pheidole moerens; Pogonomyrmex badius; Prenolepis imparis; Pseudomyrmex cubaensis; Pseudomyrmex ejectus; Pseudomyrmex mexicanus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Tapinoma melanocephalum; Technomyrmex albipes; Tetramorium bicarinatum; Tetramorium caldarium; Tetramorium simillimum; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; extension; biology; colony; mating; flight; morphology; taxonomy; key; ecology; distribution; behavior; impact; medical; urban; 
AB  - *[Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) bossuta, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) bureni, pyramid, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) elegans, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) flavopecta, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) grandula, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) reginicula, Linepithema humile (= Iridomyrmex humilis).]
AU  - S. M. Valles, D. H. Oi and S. D. Porter
TI  - Kneallhazia (=Thelohania) solenopsae infection rate of Pseudacteon curvatus flies determined by multiplex PCR
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2009;92(2):344-349
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biological control; parasite; entomopathogen; microsporidia; Microsporidia; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Thelohania solenopsae; multiplex PCR; 
AB  - A multiplex PCR method was developed and used to determine the infection rate of Kneallhazia solenopsae in individual Pseudacteon curvatus flies in north-central Florida. Among P. curvatus flies infected with K. solenopsae, 2 amplicons were produced, one of 800 nucleotides from the P. curvatus 18S rRNA gene, and one of 318 nucleotides from the K. solenopsae 16S rRNA gene. Multiplex PCR of DNA extracted from P. curvatus flies was capable of detecting 117.5 +- 82.7 K. solenopsae spore equivalents. The mean K. solenopsae infection rate of P. curvatus from 4 sites in Gainesville and Williston, Florida, was 12.3 +- 5.0%. The K. solenopsae infection rate for P. curvatus was independent of the K. solenopsae infection rate observed among S. invicta nests from where the fly collections took place. Not all P. curvatus flies that developed in K. solenopsae -infected fire ants were positive for K. solenopsae upon eclosion.  Among 50 P. curvatus flies known to develop in K. solenopsae -infected S. invicta workers, 12 (24%) were positive for K. solenopsae at eclosion.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *Kneallhazia solenopsae was Thelohania solenopsae.
AU  - S. M. Valles, D. H. Oi and S. D. Porter
TI  - Seasonal variation and the co-occurrence of four pathogens and a group of parasites among monogyne and polygyne fire ant colonies
SO  - Biol. Control 2010;54(3):342-348
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; colonies; genetics; genotype; seasonal variability; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; pathogen; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; microsporidian; Kneallhazia solenopsae; virus; SINV-1; SINV-2; SINV-3; 
AB  - A year-long survey was conducted to determine the seasonality and co-occurrence of four pathogens and a group of parasites in colonies of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, in north-central Florida.  Solenopsis invicta colonies were sampled and examined for the presence of Pseudacteon spp. (P. curvatus, P. tricuspis, P. obtusus) parasitic phorid flies, a microsporidian pathogen (Kneallhazia solenopsae) and 3 S. invicta viruses (SINV-1, SINV-2, and SINV-3) by PCR or RT-PCR methods. In addition, the social form designation of each colony (single- or multiple-queen) was determined by genotyping worker ants at the Gp-9 locus to determine if the pathogens or parasites were associated with monogyne or polygyne fire ant colonies.  Seasonal variability was observed in the prevalence of all pathogens/parasites examined, with SINV-1, SINV-3, and K. solenopsae exhibiting pronounced seasonality.  SINV-1 and K. solenopsae infections were most prevalent among colonies during warmer periods of the year, while SINV-3 was most prevalent during the cooler periods. As hypothesized, pathogens were found more commonly in polygyne colonies than in monogyne colonies. Infection comparisons by social form revealed higher infection rates of K. solenopsae and SINV-2 in polygyne colony samples compared with monogyne colony samples. The overall colony infection and parasitism rate among the 360 colonies sampled, regardless of social form, was 60.3% (SINV-1), 8.9% (SINV-2), 10.8% (SINV-3), 22.5% (K. solenopsae), and 8.1% (Pseudacteon flies). An interesting pattern was observed between the number of different pathogens or parasites detected in monogyne and polygyne colonies. The majority of monogyne colonies (>80%) were either uninfected or infected or parasitized with only a single pathogen/parasite while the majority of polygyne colonies (>55%) were infected or parasitized with 2 or more pathogens/parasites simultaneously.  Higher pathogen/parasite prevalence among polygyne colonies is attributed to lower genetic relatedness (among nestmates), increased colony longevity, and the proclivity of polygyne colonies to share workers, brood and queens among their interconnected colonies.  Evaluation of pairwise co-occurrence data indicated that the pathogens and fly parasites were usually independently distributed among host colonies; however, unknown local factors did cause several significant deviations from expected values.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles and S. D. Porter
TI  - Identification of polygyne and monogyne fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) by multiplex PCR of Gp-9 alleles
SO  - Insect. Soc. 2003;50(2):199-200
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; polygyny; monogyny; genetics; multiplex PCR; Gp-9 alleles; alleles; genotype; genetic variation; polymerase chain reaction; DNA primers; multiplex polymerase chain reaction; 
AB  - Oligonucleotide primers were designed to dis-criminate between the Gp-9 B and Gp-9 b alleles found in monogyne and polygyne colonies of fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren. Primers specific for the Gp-9 B allele produced a 517 bp amplicon and primers specific for Gp-9 b allele pro-duced a 423 bp amplicon. When both sets of primers were multiplexed, homozygous monogyne ants produced a single 517 bp amplicon (specific for Gp-9 B), whereas heterozygous polygyne ants produced one 517 bp amplicon and one 423 bp amplicon (specific for Gp-9 B and Gp-9 b, respectively) which allowed the Gp-9 alleles to be discerned in a single reaction. This method was tested on ants from 20 monogyne colonies and 20 polygyne colonies and was 100% accurate in dis-criminating the two forms.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles and S. D. Porter
TI  - Identification of polygyne and monogyne fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) by Multiplex PCR of Gp-9 alleles.  [poster paper]
2003;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; polygyny; monogyny; Multiplex PCR; Gp-9 alleles; invasive species; 

AU  - S. M. Valles and S. D. Porter
TI  - Pseudacteon decapitating flies: potential vectors of a fire ant virus?
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2007;90(1):282-283
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon litoralis; virus vector; insect viruses; positive sense; single-stranded RNA viruses; vector potential; virus transmission; infection; Solenopsis invicta virus; Dicistroviridae; 
AB  - Although SINV does not appear to infect Pseudacteon decapitating flies, horizontal transmission of SINV could occur mechanically from contamination of the ovipositor.  This type of virus vectoring has been reported previously and is the primary route of transmission among some ascoviruses in Lepidoptera.  However, SINV infection of S. invicta appears to be limited to cells of the digestive tract, especially the midgut. Further, we have not detected SINV in the hemolymph of infected fire ants.  Thus, it is unlikely that oviposition into the hemocoel by Pseudacteon decapitating flies would result in SINV contamination of the ovipositor.  Indeed, flies allowed to oviposit in SINV-infected fire ants for several hours were all negative for SINV.  However, mechanical transmission still could have occurred, but was not detectable by the RT-PCR method employed; the limit of detection of SINV by RT-PCR is estimated to be between 50 and 100 copies.  Our results indicate that SINV does not replicate within Pseudacteon decapitating flies that parasitize S. invicta.  Flies appeared to develop normally from SINV-infected S. invicta workers.  Mechanical transmission of SINV to uninfected ants by oviposition appears unlikely.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles and S. D. Porter
TI  - Procedures to mitigate the impact of Solenopsis invicta Virus 3 in fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) rearing facilities
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2013;96(1):252-254
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; nests; Solenopsis invicta Virus 3; SINV-3; bleach; sodium hypochlorite; UV radiation; mechanical movement; infectious dust particles; rearing; 
AB  - During the initial characterization of Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3), virus-infected fire ant colonies were retrieved from the field and maintained in the laboratory rearing facility at the USDA-ARS CMAVE, Gainesville, FL. During this time, all uninfected S. invicta colonies housed in the facility contracted SINV-3 infections. Virus infection in fire ant rearing facilities and methods to render the virus inactive and to limit its impact on fire ant rearing are described.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles and S. D. Porter
TI  - Dose response of red imported fire ant colonies to Solenopsis invicta virus 3
SO  - Arch. Virol. 2015;160(10):2407-2413
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; Dicistroviridae; Aparavirus; Solenopsis invicta virus-1; SINV-3; dose response; 
AB  - Baiting tests were conducted to evaluate the effect of increasing Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) dose on fire ant colonies. Actively growing early-stage fire ant (Solenopsis invicta Buren) laboratory colonies were pulse-exposed for 24 hours to six concentrations of SINV-3 (101, 103, 105, 107, 109 genome equivalents/μl) in 1 ml of a 10 % sucrose bait and monitored regularly for two months. SINV-3 concentration had a significant effect on colony health. Brood rating (proportion of brood to worker ants) began to depart from the control group at 19 days for the 109 concentration and 26 days for the 107 concentration. At 60 days, brood rating was significantly lower among colonies treated with 109, 107, and 105 SINV-3 concentrations. The intermediate concentration, 105, appeared to cause a chronic, low-level infection with one colony (n = 9) supporting virus replication. Newly synthesized virus was not detected in any fire ant colonies treated at the 101 concentration, indicating that active infections failed to be established at this level of exposure. The highest bait concentration chosen, 109, appeared most effective from a control aspect; mean colony brood rating at this concentration (1.1 ± 0.9 at the 60 day time point) indicated poor colony health with minimal brood production. No clear relationship was observed between the quantity of plus genome strand detected and brood rating. Conversely, there was a strong relationship between the presence of the replicative genome strand and declining brood rating, which may serve as a predictor of disease severity. Recommendations for field treatment levels to control fire ants with SINV-3 are discussed.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles and S. D. Porter
TI  - Influence of temperature on the pathogenicity of Solenopsis invicta virus 3
SO  - J. Invertebr. Pathol. 2019;166, 107217:?? p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; caste; colonies; temperature; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogens; biopesticides; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; single-stranded RNA virus; Picornavirales; Solinviviridae; Red imported fire ant; biocontrol; 
AB  - Field evaluations assessing the prevalence of Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) have shown that the virus exhibits a distinct seasonal phenology in the host, Solenopsis invicta, that is negatively correlated with warmer temperatures. Active SINV-3 infections were established in Solenopsis invicta colonies, which were subsequently maintained at 19.1, 22.2, 25.5, 27.7, and 29.3 °C. Brood ratings declined in all SINV-3-treated colonies regardless of temperature over the initial 30 days. However, brood ratings in colonies held at 29.3 °C began increasing in the next 40 days until they were statistically equivalent to ratings for untreated control colonies. Meanwhile, brood rating continued to decline in colonies held at 19.1, 22.2, 25.5, and 27.7 °C for the duration of the test (81 days). By the end of the test, these colonies were in poor health as indicated by brood ratings in the 1 to 1.5 range. Conversely, the mean brood rating for colonies held at 29.3 °C increased to above 3, indicating vigorous growth. Worker ants from SINV-3-treated colonies maintained at 19.1, 22.2, and 25.5 °C showed strong production of the VP2 capsid protein by Western blotting; 100% of the colonies sampled (n = 3) showed production of VP2. However, VP2 was detected in only 33% of colonies maintained at 27.7 °C, and the VP2 response was nearly undetectable in all colonies maintained at 29.3 °C. These results indicate that virus assembly does not appear to be occurring efficiently at the higher temperatures. Also, the quantity of SINV-3 detected in queens was significantly lower in those maintained at 29.3 °C compared with the lower temperature treatments. These results indicate that warm summer temperatures combined with fire ant thermoregulatory behavior and perhaps behavioral fevers may explain the low prevalence of SINV-3 in fire ant colonies during the summer.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles, S. D. Porter and L. A. Calcaterra
TI  - Prospecting for viral natural enemies of the fire ant Solenopsis invicta in Argentina
SO  - PLoS ONE 2018;13(2), e0192377:17 p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; workers; genetics; genome; genomic libraries; sequence databases; cDNA libraries; sequence assembly tools; RNA sequence analysis; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; Dicistroviridae; viral pathogens; Solenopsis invicta virus 5; SINV-5; 
AB  - Metagenomics and next generation sequencing were employed to discover new virus natural enemies of the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren in its native range (i.e., Formosa, Argentina) with the ultimate goal of testing and releasing new viral pathogens into U.S. S. invicta populations to provide natural, sustainable control of this ant. RNA was purified from worker ants from 182 S. invicta colonies, which was pooled into 4 groups according to location. A gene library was created from each group and sequenced using Illumina Miseq technology. After a series of winnowing methods to remove S. invicta genes, known S. invicta virus genes, and all other non-virus gene sequences, 61,944 unique singletons were identified with virus identity. These were assembled de novo yielding 171 contiguous sequences with significant identity to non-plant virus genes. Fifteen contiguous sequences exhibited very high expression rates and were detected in all four gene libraries. One contig (Contig_29) exhibited the highest expression level overall and across all four gene libraries. Random amplification of cDNA ends analyses expanded this contiguous sequence yielding a complete virus genome, which we have provisionally named Solenopsis invicta virus 5 (SINV-5). SINV-5 is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus with genome characteristics consistent with the Dicistroviridae. The replicative genome strand of SINV-5 was detected in worker ants indicating that S. invicta serves as host for the virus. Many additional sequences were identified that are likely of viral origin. These sequences await further investigation to determine their origins and relationship with S. invicta. This study expands knowledge of the diversity and relative frequencies of RNA sequences associated with the virome of S. invicta.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles, S. D. Porter, M. Y. Choi and D. H. Oi
TI  - Successful transmission of Solenopsis invicta virus 3 to Solenopsis invicta fire ant colonies in oil, sugar, and cricket bait formulations
SO  - J. Invertebr. Pathol. 2013;113(3):198-204
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogens; biopesticides; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; single-stranded RNA virus; Picornavirales; Red imported fire ant; biocontrol; 
AB  - Tests were conducted to evaluate whether Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) could be delivered in various bait formulations to fire ant colonies and measure the corresponding colony health changes associated with virus infection in Solenopsis invicta. Three bait formulations (10% sugar solution, cricket paste, and soybean oil adsorbed to defatted corn grit) effectively transmitted SINV-3 infections to S. invicta colonies. Correspondingly, viral infection was shown to be detrimental to colony health and productivity. By day 32, all ant colonies exposed to a single 24 h pulse treatment of SINV-3 became infected with the virus regardless of the bait formulation. However, the SINV-3 sugar and cricket bait-treated colonies became infected more rapidly than the oil-treated colonies. Sugar and cricket-treated colonies exhibited significant declines in their brood ratings compared with the untreated control and oil bait-treated colonies. Measures of colony health and productivity evaluated at the end of the study (day 47) showed a number of differences among the bait treatments and the control group. Statistically significant and similar patterns were exhibited among treatments for the quantity of live workers (lower), live brood (lower), total colony weight (lower), worker mortality (higher), proportion larvae (lower), and queen weight (lower). Significant changes were also observed in the number of eggs laid by queens (lower) and the corresponding ovary rating in SINV-3-treated colonies. The study provides the first successful demonstration of SINV-3 as a potential biopesticide against fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles, S. D. Porter and A. E. Firth
TI  - Solenopsis invicta virus 3: pathogenesis and stage specificity in red imported fire ants
SO  - Virology 2014;460-461:66-71
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; workers; behavior; tropism; Solenopsis invicta Virus 3; SINV-3; caste; RNA virus; pathogenesis; stage specificity; 
AB  - Solenopsis invicta colonies were exposed to purified preparations of Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) to investigate virus pathogenesis at the colony level. Time course experiments revealed an infection exhibiting specificity for the adult stage (workers). SINV-3 genome and a capsid protein were increasingly present in worker ants with time. Northern blot analysis revealed two bands in RNA preparations from worker ants infected with SINV-3 corresponding to the genomic and sub-genomic species. Conversely, larval RNA preparations from SINV-3-infected colonies showed a near-complete absence of SINV-3 genome or sub-genome. The data confirm that SINV-3 is the etiological agent causing mortality among S. invicta colonies in the laboratory. We propose that SINV-3 infection somehow alters worker ant behavior, which may prevent them from acquiring and/or distributing solid food to the larvae. Consequently, larval mortality and impaired queen health occur as a result of starvation or neglect by the worker caste.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles, C. A. Strong, D. H. Oi, S. D. Porter, R. M. Pereira, R. K. Vander Meer, Y. Hashimoto, L. M. Hooper-Bùi, H. Sánchez-Arroyo, T. Davis, V. Karpakakunjaram, K. M. Vail, L. C. Graham, J. A. Briano, L. A. Calcaterra, L. E. Gilbert, R. Ward, K. Ward, J. B. Oliver, G. Taniguchi and D. C. Thompson
TI  - Phenology, distribution, and host specificity of Solenopsis invicta virus-1
SO  - J. Invertebr. Pathol. 2007;96(1):18-27
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus; Cardiocondyla; Cyphomyrmex; Dorymyrmex; Formica; Hypoponera; Linepithema; Monomorium; Neivamyrmex; Odontomachus; Paratrechina; Pheidole; Pogonomyrmex; Solenopsis carolinensis; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis pergandii; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Solenopsis xyloni; Trachymyrmex; Xenomyrmex; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; Mexico; USA; Alabama; California; Florida; Georgia; Hawaii; Louisiana; Mississippi; New Mexico; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; South America; Argentina; scientific; seasonal; phenology; seasonal variation; temperature; distribution; host specificity; Solenopsis invicta virus-1; SINV-1; SINV-1A; Dicistroviridae; Solenopsis invicta virus-1A; nucleotide sequences; sequence homology; positive sense; single-stranded RNA viruses; insect viruses; disease prevalence; phylogeny; 
AB  - Studies were conducted to examine the phenology, geographic distribution, and host specificity of the Solenopsis invicta virus-1 (SINV-1). Two genotypes examined, SINV-1 and -1A, exhibited similar seasonal prevalence patterns. Infection rates among colonies of S. invicta in Gainesville, Florida, were lowest from early winter (December) to early spring (April) increasing rapidly in late spring (May) and remaining high through August before declining again in the fall (September/October). Correlation analysis revealed a significant relationship between mean monthly temperature and SINV-1 (p<0.0005, r=0.82) and SINV-1A (p<0.0001, r=0.86) infection rates in S. invicta colonies. SINV-1 was widely distributed among S. invicta populations. The virus was detected in S. invicta from Argentina and from all U.S. states examined, with the exception of New Mexico. SINV-1 and -1A were also detected in other Solenopsis species. SINV-1 was detected in Solenopsis richteri and the S. invicta/richteri hybrid collected from northern Alabama and Solenopsis geminata from Florida. SINV-1A was detected in S. geminata and Solenopsis carolinensis in Florida and the S. invicta/richteri hybrid in Alabama. Of the 1989 arthropods collected from 6 pitfall trap experiments from Gainesville and Williston, Florida, none except S. invicta tested positive for SINV-1 or SINV-1A. SINV-1 did not appear to infect or replicate within Sf9 or Dm-2 cells in vitro. The number of SINV-1 genome copies did not significantly increase over the course of the experiment, nor were any cytopathic effects observed. Phylogenetic analyses of SINV-1/-1A nucleotide sequences indicated significant divergence between viruses collected from Argentina and the U.S.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. M. Valles, J. K. Wetterer and S. D. Porter
TI  - The Red Imported Fire Ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in the West Indies: Distribution of natural enemies and a possible test bed for release of self-sustaining biocontrol agents
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2015;98(4):1101-1105
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; Anguilla; Antigua; Bahamas; Great Stirrup Cay; New Providence; Barbuda; Grand Cayman; Jamaica; Montserrat; Nevis; Puerto Rico; Isla de Vieques; Virgin Islands; Saint Croix; Saint Kitts; Saint John; Saint Martin; Saint Thomas; Tortola; Turks & Caicos; Providenciales; South America; Aruba; Trinidad; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; distribution; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite; parasitoid; microsporidia; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Vairimorpha invictae; virus; RNA virus; SINV; densovirus; SiDNV; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; tuna baits; 
AB  - Sample collections of Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) were taken from 20 islands of the West Indies and evaluated for the presence of key pathogens and parasites of this invasive pest ant. We hypothesized that bottleneck events during the introduction of this ant species in the West Indies would have resulted in populations devoid, or nearly so, of natural enemies. Monogyne and polygyne social forms were found throughout the islands surveyed with monogyny being more prevalent (65%) compared with polygyny (35%). Among 254 samples, only 25 (~10%) tested positive for the presence of pathogens or parasites. The microsporidian Kneallhazia solenopsae was the most prevalent pathogen detected; it was found in 20 colonies. A second microsporidian species, Vairimorpha invictae, was shown to be present in a polygyne sample collected from St. Croix -- the first detection of this pathogen outside South America. Similarly, Solenopsis invicta densovirus (SiDNV) was detected in one polygyne sample from Anguilla. SiDNV is not found in S. invicta U.S. populations, so this detection also represents the first geographic discovery outside of South America. Two species of Pseudacteon decapitating flies were found to have dispersed into the Bahamas. Utilization of the islands of the West Indies for release, establishment, and impact assessment of S. invicta natural enemies is discussed.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer, D. P. Jouvenaz and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Chemical mimicry in a parasitoid (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae) of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - J. Chem. Ecol. 1989;15(8):2247-2261
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; Mato Grosso; Mato Grosso do Sul; scientific; chemistry; cuticular hydrocarbons; behavior; nestmate recognition; mimicry; parasite; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; biocontrol; 
AB  - A wasp (Orasema sp.) parasitic on the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, develops to the adult stage within the ant colony, where wasp larvae are ectoparasitic on ant pupae. This phase of the parasite's life cycle requires a mechanism of integration into the host colony. Gas chromatographic profiles of hexane soaks of various stages of the parasite and host suggest that during development within the ant colony the parasite acquires the colony odor of the host through a passive mechanism, based on simple contact and other social interactions. No parasite-specific components were observed. After leaving the host nest as adults, the parasite biosynthesizes a parasite-specific cuticular compound, while retaining residual amounts of the host acquired components. This complicated scenario is consistent with current knowledge of nestmate recognition and the preferential treatment of ant workers to their brood.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer and S. D. Porter
TI  - Fate of newly mated queens introduced into monogyne and polygyne Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) colonies
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 2001;94(2):289-297
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; nest; queens; monogyny; polygyny; caste; wings; queen pheromones; olfactory stimulation; nestmate recognition; workers; alates; dealates; behavior; aggressive behavior; aggression; olfactometers; 
AB  - Nestmate recognition is of prime importance in maintaining ant colony integration and organization. Monogyne red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, colonies are highly territorial and aggressive toward non-nestmate conspecific workers. In contrast, workers from polygyne nests in the United States show no aggression toward workers from other conspecific colonies (polygyne or monogyne). Nests within a polygyne population form a 'supercolony,' with free exchange of workers and food between nests. The difference in conspecific nestmate recognition is a major distinguishing feature of the two S. invicta forms in the United States. We report here the discovery of an exception to this dichotomy. High levels of worker aggression are released by the introduction of newly mated queens into both polygyne and monogyne colonies. This suggests that nestmate recognition involving female sexuals does not follow the same mechanism used to explain nestmate recognition behavior between workers.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer and S. D. Porter
TI  - Potential applications of the response of phorid flies to fire ant semiochemicals.  [abstract]
2001;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; electrical stimulation; semiochemicals; symbiont; myrmecophile; Parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; rearing; biocontrol; 
AB  - Electrical stimulation of fire ants induces them to release semiochemicals. We discovered that these semiochemicals activate resting phorid fly parasites to fly toward the odor source and then attack the ants. We have adapted the electrical stimulation system to rearing boxes to test whether or not the production of flies can be increased using this method. The results from our first attempts at improving phorid fly (Pseudacteon tricuspis) rearing using electrical stimulation showed the following in paired treatment/control comparisons: there were 29% more attacking flies in the treatments, which resulted in a mean increase in fly production of 19%. These first results are highly encouraging and point to the potential of this method in increasing rearing efficiency. We hope to demonstrate in the future that with this method fewer flies will have to be cycled back into rearing to achieve the desired production rate, thus providing more flies for release. A preliminary study of the effects of fire ant electrical stimulation and rearing efficiency of another phorid fly, Pseudacteon curvatus, also indicates production increases. These semiochemicals have great potential in phorid fly rearing and in the development of an efficient and specific trap for phorid fly detection in the field. Research to isolate and identify the active compounds is underway.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer and S. D. Porter
TI  - Fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. worker alarm pheromones attract Pseudacteon phorid flies. [abstract]
2002;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; worker; alarm pheromones; Pseudacteon tricuspis; 
AB  - The parasitic phorid fly, Psedacteon tricuspis was found to be attracted to the volatile compounds released by shaken fire ant workers.  Among the compounds released were alarm pheromones, venom alkaloids, and recruitment pheromones.  In subsequent bioassays we eliminated poison sac contents and recruitment pheromones as possible attractants. We have demonstrated the involvement of alarm pheromones in the attraction of this phorid fly to their host fire ant.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer and S. D. Porter
TI  - Biochemical evidence for cryptic Solenopsis species that are morphologically S. invicta.  [abstract]
2015;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; Argentina; scientific; chemistry; venom alkaloids; cuticular hydrocarbons; morphology; Dufour's glands; recruitment pheromones; taxonomy; distribution; 
AB  - Biochemical analyses of  > 180 colonies from northern Argentina indicate the presence of three distinct chemical patterns, including that of S. invicta from the USA. Morphologically the three chemotypes are indistinguishable. Where these chemotypes are collected sympatrically, there is no indication of introgression. The venom alkaloids and cuticular hydrocarbons are biosynthesized by distinctly different pathways and can be considered independent chemotaxonomic characters. In addition, analyses of Dufour's glands, the source of recruitment pheromones, showed the presence of the major sesquiterpene found in USA S. invicta Dufour's glands from one of the Argentina S. invicta chemotypes, but not from the other two Argentina chemotypes.  This is excellent evidence for morphologically cryptic species of Solenopsis in northern Argentina.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee (s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer, S. D. Porter, D. H. Oi, S. M. Valles and R. M. Pereira
TI  - Area-wide suppression of invasive fire ant populations.  [abstract]
SO  - p. 78-79, In: FAO/IAEA International conference: Area-wide control of insects.  Integrating the sterile insect and related ant other techniques.  9-13 May 2005, Vienna International Centre, Vienna, Austria 2005;IAEA-CN-131MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; chemical control; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Microsporidia; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; entomopathogenic protozoa; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; 
AB  - The fire ants, Solenopsis invicta and Solenopsis richteri, were inadvertently introduced into the United States early in the 1900s and currently inhabit over 150 million hectares in Puerto Rico and twelve southern states from Texas to Virginia. Imported fire ants have also become established in isolated sites in California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Maryland. The fire ant's large numbers and potent sting have resulted in significant medical, agricultural, and environmental impacts. The population densities in the U.S. are 5-10 times higher than in South America, most likely due to their escape from natural enemies. Recently, biological control agents have become available for introduction into the United States, e.g. phorid fly parasites and a microsporidian pathogen, setting the stage for integrated fire ant management. An areawide fire ant management project proposal was funded by USDA/ARS Headquarters to demonstrate control of fire ant populations over large areas using commercially available insecticide bait and self-sustaining biological control agents. Control and treatment demonstration sites (120ha + periphery) were set up in each of five states (Florida, Oklahoma, Texas, South Carolina, and Mississippi). The control and treatment sites both had bait (hydramethylnon and methoprene) applications, but only the treatment site had biocontrol agents released around the periphery. After 3.5 years phorid fly parasites have been established at the demonstration sites. The microsporidian pathogen is established in all sites except Mississippi. Fire ant populations have been reduced by 85-99% in the treatment demonstration sites. Environmental assessment has demonstrated that bait toxicants do affect non-target ant species that would otherwise play a role in decreasing fire ant reinfestation rates. Educational outreach activities resulted in informative brochures, the establishment of a program website, videos, and general information on fire ants. The research component has responded with additional biocontrol organisms and better pathogen detection methods.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer, S. D. Porter, D. H. Oi, S. M. Valles and R. M. Pereira
TI  - Area-wide suppression of invasive fire ant populations
SO  - Area-Wide Control of Insect Pests: From Research to Field Implementation 2007:487-496
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; chemical control; baits; area-wide; integrated pest management; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Microsporidia; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; entomopathogenic protozoa; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; 
AB  - The fire ants Solenopsis invicta Buren and Solenopsis richteri Forel were inadvertently introduced into the USA early in the 1900s and currently inhabit over 150 million hectares in Puerto Rico and twelve southern states from Texas to Virginia. Imported fire ants have also become established in isolated sites in Arizona, California, Maryland, and New Mexico. The large numbers and potent sting of fire ants have resulted in significant medical, agricultural, and environmental impacts. The population densities in the USA are five to ten times higher than in South America, most likely due to their escape from natural enemies. Recently, biological control agents have become available in the USA, e.g. Pseudacteon spp. decapitating fly parasitoids and a microsporidian pathogen Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen & Hazard, setting the stage for integrated fire ant management. An area-wide fire ant management project proposal was funded by United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Services headquarters to demonstrate control of fire ant populations over large areas using commercially available insecticide baits and self-sustaining biological control agents. Untreated, bait control and integrated pest management (IPM) demonstration sites (120 hectares and periphery) were set up in each of five states (Florida, Mississippi, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas). The control and IPM sites both had bait (hydramethylnon and methoprene) applications, but only the IPM site had biological control agents released around the periphery. After 3.5 years, decapitating fly parasites have been established at the demonstration sites. The microsporidian pathogen is established in all sites except Mississippi. Fire ant populations have been reduced by 85-99% in the IPM demonstration sites as compared to untreated areas of the same sites. Environmental assessment has demonstrated that bait toxicants do affect non-target ant species but do not affect the arthropod species richness. Educational outreach activities resulted in informative brochures, the establishment of a programme web site, videos, and general information on fire ants. The research component has responded with additional biological control organisms and better pathogen detection methods.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Chemical mimicry in the myrmecophilous beetle Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis
SO  - Science 1982;218(4574):806-808
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; scientific; chemistry; cuticular hydrocarbons; symbiont; myrmecophile; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis; chemical mimicry; 
AB  - The myrmecophilus beetle Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) was found to have species-specific cuticular hydrocarbons acquired from one of its hosts, the ant Solenopsis richteri Forel. Removal from its ant host resulted in loss of the host hydrocarbons, leaving a cuticular pattern innate to the beetle. When beetles were transferred to colonies of three other Solenopsis species, they acquired the specific hydrocarbons associated with each of the new hosts. This passive integration mechanism is coupled with the beetle's armored exterior to enable it to cope with multiple aggressive hosts.  ©AAAS.    (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. K. Vander Meer and D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Parasite and host ant interactions: The chemical ecology of parasite integration.  [abstract]
1989;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; chemistry; ecology; nestmate recognition; symbiont; parasite; mimicry; 

AU  - R. K. Vander Meer, D. P. Wojcik and D. P. Jouvenaz
TI  - Chemical differentiation of cryptic fire ant species?  [abstract]
1988;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; Argentina; scientific; chemistry; venom; cuticular hydrocarbons; chemical mimicry; chromatotype; 

AU  - C. Vanderwoude, S. Boudjelas, M. Gruber, B. Hoffmann, D. Oi and S. Porter
TI  - Biosecurity plan for invasive ants in the Pacific Region
SO  - Invasive alien species: Observations and issues from around the world 2021;2: Issues and Invasions in Asia and the Pacific Region:275-288
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Anoplolepis gracilipes; Linepithema humile; Nylanderia fulva; Pheidole megacephala; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trichomyrmex destructor; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Oceania; Pacific; review; return; plan; response; prevention; quarantine; behavior; high interspecific aggression; human commerce mediated dispersal; impact; ecological; polygyny; sociality; sociotomy; supercoloniality; symbiosis with plant pests; regional coordination; invasive ants; 
AB  - The well-being of Pacific island communities and the ecosystems that support them is inextricably linked. Island ecosystems are fragile, complex, and have often evolved in isolation. Many species have not evolved defenses against common predators such as rats, cats, and invasive ants, and the introduction of new invasive species threatens the delicate balance between island communities and the ecosystems that nourish and sustain them.  Invasive ants pose an especially severe threat and impact human health, agriculture, and the natural environment. A best-practice integrated biosecurity system is needed to prevent the entry and establishment of these species as well as mitigate impacts caused by priority invasive ants currently present in the region. We recommend a regional approach to invasive ant biosecurity be considered, which includes the essential elements of prevention, early detection, rapid response, ongoing management, capacity building, outreach, and research. This system should operate at island, national, and regional scales.  The strategy has six main objectives:  Prevention (prevent the entry of invasive ants into the Pacific region and prevent their spread to new locations within the region).  Early detection and incursion response (detect and eradicate new invasive ant incursions while eradication is still possible and costs are low).  Management of existing species (mitigate the impacts of priority invasive ants already present).  Public awareness and engagement (increase public awareness of invasive ant impacts, enlist their cooperation and support for detection and control).  Enhance capacity for invasive ant biosecurity and management (prevention plans, pre-approved control chemicals, monitoring protocols, etc.).  Targeted research (develop an active research program that provides practical improvements in detection and mitigation of invasive ants).  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.
AU  - E. L. Vargo and S. D. Porter
TI  - Colony reproduction by budding in the polygyne form of Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1989;82(3):307-313
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; colony reproduction; growth; polydomy; migration; territory; mound; 
AB  - Indirect evidence has suggested that polygyne colonies of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, reproduce by budding.  To verify directly the occurrence of budding, queens in polygyne colonies were marked with fine wire and introduced to two field sites previously cleared of fire ant mounds.  After 4-5 mo, all mounds were mapped and collected.  Marked queens originating from the same colony were found distributed among three to eight different mounds separated by up to 50 m.  Marked queens from different colonies were not recovered in the same mound, suggesting that queens do not move freely among established mounds which lack some former connection.  The total weights of the colonies increased about four times during the course of the study, indicating substantial growth of colonies in addition to active budding.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.
AU  - E. L. Vargo and S. D. Porter
TI  - Reproduction by virgin queen fire ants in queenless colonies: comparative study of three taxa (Solenopsis richteri, hybrid S. invicta/richteri, S. geminata) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Insect. Soc. 1993;40(3):283-293
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; Texas; scientific; pheromone; reproduction; virgin queen; queen control; execution; 
AB  - In the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, some winged virgin queens are known to shed their wings (dealate) upon removal of the mated mother queen. These virgin queens then develop their ovaries and begin to lay eggs, thereby foregoing the option of leaving on mating flights and attempting to found their own colonies. Such a response of virgin queens to queenlessness has not been reported for other ants. In order to determine if virgin queens of some other fire ants (subgenus Solenopsis) would respond in the same way, experiments were conducted on S. richteri, hybrid S. invicta/richteri and S. geminata, a member of a species complex different from that of the other taxa. Just as in S. invicta, virgin queens of S. richteri and the hybrid dealated and began to lay eggs within days of the removal of the queen. In addition, workers executed many of the reproductively active virgin queens, a phenomenon also found in S. invicta. In contrast, virgin queens of S. geminata did not dealate or quickly begin to lay eggs upon separation from the queen. Reasons for the variability in the response of virgin queens of the different species may be 1) higher probability of reproductive success for unmated dealated queens compared to normal claustral founding in S. invicta and S. richteri linked to relatively frequent loss of the mother queen; or 2) phylogenetic constraint.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. J. Vazquez and S. D. Porter
TI  - Re-confirming host specificity of the fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) after field release in Florida
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2005;88(1):107-110
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster miamiana; Aphaenogaster c.f. carolinensis; Camponotus floridanus; Camponotus impressus; Crematogaster minutissima; Crematogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Forelius pruinosus; Linepithema humile; Odontomachus brunneus; Pheidole dentata; Pogonomyrmex badius; Pseudomyrmex pallidus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; nest; head width; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; field release; host preference testing; 
AB  - Post-release monitoring confirms that the Formosa biotype of P. curvatus is not attracted to non-Solenopsis ants. Flies were attracted to the native fire ant, S. geminata, at very low rates (<5% of that with S. invicta) but virtually no oviposition attempts were observed. Overall results were consistent with laboratory predictions except attraction rates to nontarget fire ants in the field were much lower than in small laboratory test chambers.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. J. Vazquez, S. D. Porter and J. A. Briano
TI  - Host specificity of a biotype of the fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Dipetera: Phoridae) from Northern Argentina
SO  - Environ. Entomol. 2004;33(5):1436-1441
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; California; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biotype; host specificity; host range; preference test; biocontrol; 
AB  - We tested the host specificity of Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier from Formosa, Argentina on North American colonies of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, and the native fire ants, Solenopsis geminata (Fabricius) and Solenopsis xyloni McCook. No-choice tests showed that P. curvatus hovered over and attacked all three species of fire ants. The mean number of pupae successfully completing development to adult flies in the trials was 5.03  +- 1.55 (mean +- SE) per female fly in S. invicta, 0.66 +- 0.24 per female fly in S. xyloni, and 0 per female fly in S. geminata. Paired preference tests showed that P. curvatus preferred to hover over S. invicta instead of S. xyloni 77 +- 3% (mean +- SE) of the time and preferred S. invicta over S. geminata 87 +- 4% of the time. The oviposition attempts of active female P. curvatus were 2.8 times higher on S. invicta than on S. xyloni and 16 times higher on S. invicta than on S. geminata. These results demonstrate that this new biotype of P. curvatus is more host specific to North American red imported fire ants than a previous biotype collected from black fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Solenopsis geminata & Solenopsis invicta collected in Florida.  Solenopsis xyloni collected in California.]
AU  - R. J. Vazquez, S. D. Porter and J. A. Briano
TI  - Field release and establishment of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus on red imported fire ants in Florida
SO  - BioControl 2006;51(2):207-216
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; nest; mound; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; field release; biotype; monitoring; 
AB  - Decapitating phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are being studied as classical biological control agents of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae) is a small decapitating fly that attacks small fire ant workers. We released a biotype of P. curvatus from Formosa, Argentina, at three sites near Gainesville, FL. Field releases were conducted in the spring and summer of 2003 and monitored monthly. Flies were discovered within 5 weeks at the spring site and then monthly thereafter. By late spring 2004, flies released at this site had expanded 1.6 km both north and south and about 0.8 km westward. Initially, we found no flies from the two summer 2003 releases but we were successful at finding them 8 months after release during spring 2004. This paper documents the first successful release(s) of P. curvatus on red imported fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. T. Vogt, S. D. Porter, D. A. Nordlund and R. Smith
TI  - A modified rearing system for production of Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae), a parasitoid of imported fire ants
SO  - Biol. Control 2003;28(3):346-353
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; rearing system; Pseudacteon curvatus; Diptera; Phoridae; parasitoid; 
AB  - A self-contained, climate-controlled box for exposing fire ants to attack by Pseudacteon parasitoids was developed.  The initial system, which is being used to rear Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, consists of large (about 244 cm L x 97 cm W x 50 cm H), well-ventilated boxes ('attack boxes') housed in a climate-controlled room (approx. 28 ºC, 80% RH, 12:12 (L:D) h).  Adult flies emerge into the boxes, which contain live host ants (Solenopsis invicta Buren).  Host ants are confined in a series of trays within the box, each containing a pair of inverted cups under which the ants can hide.  The cups alternate up and down, inducing the ants to trail back and forth within each tray.  A modified system used for Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier consists of closed boxes, through which preconditioned air is pumped to maintain high relative humidity.  Steam is used to generate humidity in a small, temperature- controlled room from which conditioned air is drawn, and infrared heating elements mounted above the attack box prevent condensation.  This new system maintains high relative humidity (range 80-90%) crucial for activity and survival of P. curvatus.  System performance was monitored in 4 ways: (1) environmental conditions within the system (RH, temperature, dew point, and light intensity); (2) production of P. curvatus; (3) successful development and emergence of P. curvatus; and (4) attack rates throughout the box.  The modified system is capable of producing >1400 flies/day/attack box.  This system will be useful for researchers with limited space in which rearing and research activities are conducted simultaneously.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - J. K. Wetterer and S. D. Porter
TI  - The little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata: Distribution, impact, control
SO  - Sociobiology 2003;42(1):1-41
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Wasmannia affinis; Wasmannia auropunctata; Wasmannia auropunctata auropunctata; Wasmannia auropunctata australis; Wasmannia auropunctata laevifrons; Wasmannia auropunctata nigricans; Wasmannia auropunctata obscura; Wasmannia auropunctata pulla; Wasmannia auropunctata rugosa; Wasmannia iheringi; Wasmannia lutzi; Wasmannia rochai; Wasmannia scrobifera; Wasmannia sigmoidea; Wasmannia sulcaticeps; Wasmannia villosa; Wasmannia williamsi; Myrmicinae; Africa; Cameroon; Gabon; Asia; Cook Islands; New Caledonia; Tuvalu; Wallis and Futuna Islands; Solomon Islands; Vanuatu; Europe; England; North America; Bahamas; Barbados; Belize; Bermuda; Canada; British Columbia; Manitoba; Ontario; Quebec; Caribbean; Cocos Islands; Costa Rica; Cuba; Curacao; Dominica; Dominican Republic; Dutch Antilles; Haiti; Honduras; Grenada; Guadeloupe; Guatemala; Jamaica; La Sola; Les Saints; Marie Galante; Margarita; Martinique; Mexico; Mona; Nicaragua; Panama; Puerto Rico; St. Croix; St. John; St. Lucia; St. Vincent; Trinidad; USA; California; Florida; Hawaii; Virgin Islands; South America; Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Colombia; Ecuador; Galapagos Islands; Guyana; Paraguay; Uruguay; Venezuela; review; biology; polygyny; temperature; morphology; taxonomy; identification; ecology; distribution; foraging; aggression; tending Hemiptera; impact; ecological; urban; chemical control; biocontrol; quarantine; invasive species; exotic species; greenhouse pest; 
AB  - The little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata, has been increasing in importance as an exotic pest. Here we review published and unpublished information on its distribution, ecology, impact, and control. Wasmannia auropunctata occurs throughout most of the warmer parts of the New World, from subtropical Argentina to subtropical Mexico and through much of the Caribbean, though it is not clear whether this species in native to this entire region. During the past century, exotic populations of W. auropunctata have become established in numerous other places, including the Galapagos Islands, West Africa (Gabon, Cameroon, and possibly the Republic of Congo and the Democratic Republic of Congo), Melanesia (New Caledonia, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and possibly Tuvalu), Polynesia (Wallis and Futuna and Hawaii), the mainland US (Florida and possibly California), and on subtropical Atlantic islands (the Bahamas and Bermuda). The latitudinal range of known outdoors populations of W. auropunctata is from 32o40'S in Argentina to 32o20'N in Bermuda. Wasmannia auropunctata is also a greenhouse pest in more temperate regions, such as England and Canada. In many areas, W. auropunctata can be a significant agricultural pest, not only stinging agricultural workers, but also enhancing populations of Homoptera. Homoptera cause damage both through sapping plants of nutrients and by increasing the occurrence of diseases, including viral and fungal infections. In addition, W. auropunctata has negative impacts on many animals, both invertebrates and vertebrates, though most reports on such impact have been anecdotal. The impacts of W. auropunctata populations seem to be most severe on tropical islands where it is not native, such as the Galapagos, New Caledonia, and the Solomon Islands. Reports of widespread blindness in both domestic and native mammals caused by W. auropunctata stings deserve serious attention. Chemical control of W. auropunctata may be possible for small exotic populations spread over a few dozen hectares or less. For large exotic infestations, the only hope for long-term control appears to be classical biocontrol.          *[Wasmannia williamsoni misspelled Wasmannia williamsi.]
AU  - W. B. Wheeler, D. P. Jouvenaz, D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks, C. H. Van Middelem, C. S. Lofgren, S. Nesbitt, L. Williams and R. Brown
TI  - Mirex residues in nontarget organisms after application of 10-5 bait for fire ant control, northeast Florida--1972-74
SO  - Pestic. Monit. J. 1977;11:146-156
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; 
AB  - *[no ant data; data results from treatment for fire ants.]
AU  - S. Wiley, L. Thompson, M. Korzukhin and S. D. Porter
TI  - Potential RIFA range expansion - a GIS view
1999;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; distribution; expansion; invasive species; model; GIS; 
AB  - GIS provides the tools to build a spatial model using physiographic features to predict temperature suitability for RIFA colonization on a local scale. Spatial statistics techniques in a GIS framework can be used to incorporate heterogeneity into a landscape model. After additional research to determine the realtive importance of individual mitigating factors, this model could be used to refine the predictions of the dynamic model developed by Thompson, et al (1999). Reliable forecasting of colonization success in areas threatened by RIFA infestation will allow policy makers and administrators to plan, fund, and implement regulatory activities. This may save millions of dollars in economic loses attributed to fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. Wiley, L. C. Thompson, M. D. Korzukhin and S. D. Porter
TI  - A GIS representation of potential red imported fire ant range expansion across the United States
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arizona; Arkansas; California; Delaware; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Maryland; Mississippi; Nevada; New Mexico; North Carolina; Oregon; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; Virginia; Washington; scientific; colony growth; colony area; alate production; distribution; temperature; soil temperature; expansion; invasive species; model; GIS; 
AB  - The future range of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, (RIFA) within the United States was predicted based on its current distribution. A dynamic model of colony growth with two time steps per day was formulated to evaluate colony area and alate production. Colony growth rate depends on daily max/min soil temperatures. Temperature records from 4,537 meteorological stations within the current (near 1.5 million km2) and potential range of RIFA were obtained from NOAA data banks. At each station, a colony was allowed to grow and lifetime female alate production was calculated. Alate production was then matched to the current distribution extremes in Arkansas, Tennessee and Oklahoma. Four zones of colony proliferation success were defined: certain, possible, undemonstrated, and improbable. An annual precipitation limit was selected to indicate regions where arid conditions may prohibit growth in non-irrigated areas. Results of the model predict that RIFA will likely move 80 to150 km North in Oklahoma and Arkansas. They will also likely continue expanding into portions of Virginia, Maryland and Delaware in the East, and New Mexico, Arizona, California, Oregon, Nevada and maybe even Washington in the West. Geographic Information Systems (GIs) software tools were used to visualize and spatially analyze the results of this model.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - S. Wiley, L. C. Thompson, S. D. Porter and M. D. Korzukhin
TI  - Modeling Amdro application scenarios
2000;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; South Carolina; Texas; scientific; nest founding; brood raiding; colony area growth; alate production; territorial competition; queen death; colony death; colony growth rate; soil temperature; invasive species; chemical control; model; 
AB  - A dynamic model was used to calculate the number of Amdro (hydramethylnon) applications per year necessary to maintain red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicba) populations under two given levels of control: 90% and 60% (keeping total colony coverage below 10% and 40%, respectively). The model was applied to data from 437 weather stations within the fire ant's current range in the southern U.S. This dynamic fire ant population model was formulated to describe major aspects of colony life history, including nest founding, brood raiding, colony area growth, alate production, territorial competition with neighbors, queen death and colony death. Colony growth rate depends on daily max/min soil temperatures. The rate of queen influx was determined by the model and a 32x32 m plot was populated with emigrating female alates from surrounding territories. The population on the plot was allowed to grow until the critical threshold of 10% or 40% of the area was infested. Amdro bait was then applied and colonies were eliminated using a mortality function that increased linearly from 0.8 for small colonies to 0.95 for large colonies. To maintain 90% of the area without fire ants, model results indicate that the number of applications per year ranged from four in southern Florida and Texas, to two on the northern limits of the ant's range. To maintain 60% control the number of applications was reduced to two over much of the lower South and one in the upper South. Boundaries for application areas were delineated using spatial analysis procedures within Geographic Information Systems (GIS) software. Maps were then generated to simplify representation of results. Future research will address timing of application intervals.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. F. Williams, D. H. Oi, S. D. Porter, R. M. Pereira and J. A. Briano
TI  - Biological control of imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Am. Entomol. 2003;49(3):144-155
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; review; biocontrol; biological control agents; natural enemies; biopesticides; invasive species; 
AB  - This paper reviews the current status of biological pesticides and self-sustaining biological control agents for use against fire ants (Solenopsis invicta and S. richteri). This paper also discusses some biological control organisms that have been or are currently under study, including parasites (parasitic ants, mites and phorid flies), pathogens (microsporidia, fungi, nematodes, bacteria and viruses), predators and competitors.    (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. F. Williams and S. D. Porter
TI  - Fire ant control
SO  - Science 1994;264(5166):1653
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; chemical control; biocontrol; 

AU  - D. F. Williams and S. D. Porter
TI  - Update on USDA-ARS biological control studies on fire ants
1996;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; Microsporidi; Thelohania solenopsae; Hymenoptera; parasitic ant; Solenopsis daguerrei; Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei; Diptera; Phoridae; biocontrol; 
AB  - The Red Imported Fire Ant, Solenopsis invicta, is a major urban and agricultural pest throughout the entire southeastern United States. This species is one of the most abundant insect pests in North America with average densities of 20-30 mounds/acre and 100-200 ants/ft2. High densities of this pest in the United States appear to be at least partially the result of biological release from natural enemies in South America where fire ant populations are usually 1/5 of what they are in the United States. Natural biological control agents are almost entirely absent in the United States. We feel that the introduction of natural enemies from South America could sufficiently shift the biological balance in the United States so that our native ants could compete with this imported pest which could reduce populations here to levels similar to those found in South America.
AU  - D. F. Williams, S. D. Porter and J. A. Briano
TI  - Biological control of fire ants.  [abstract]
1997;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; ecology; population ecology; habitats; community ecology; symbiont; myrmecophile; Thelohania solenopsae; Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; invasive species; 
AB  - Biological control research on fire ants in the USDA-ARS involves 3 highly specific naturalenemies that will stress imported fire ant populations sufficiently to allow native ants to bettercompete. These are, (1) Thelohania solenopsae, a microsporidian that kills a high percentageof infected IFA colonies, (2) Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei, a parasitic ant that attaches to the IFA queen and redirects IFA workers to tend the brood of the parasite, and (3)Pseudacteon spp., phorid flies that are strong antagonists and parasites of IFA Laboratory studies in Argentina with Thelohania solenopsae showed that healthy colonies lived longer than infected ones. After 12 weeks of artificial rearing, 50% of the healthy colonies died versus 93% of the infected ones. In field studies in Argentina, the size of infected colonies was smaller than noninfected ones and the overall density of the infected populations declined by more than 80%.  The presence of Solenopsis daguerrei in fire ant colonies has detrimental effects on colony growth and the proportion of sexual reproductives produced in the colony. S. daguerrei queens enter fire ant colonies and attach themselves to the mother queen. Previous studies have demonstrated that this parasite inhibits the fire ant mother queen and her egg production, thus causing the ant colony to collapse and eventually die out. Since S. daguerrei queens attach themselves to fire ant queens, this species could be especially useful in controlling the  multiple-queen form of the fire ant.  At least 18 species of Pseudacteon flies have been found attacking fire ants in South America. Different species attack different sizes of fire ants. These flies are common and active throughout most of the year, but different species are more active at different times of the day. Most species appear to be broadly distributed across a wide range of habitats and climates. The Pseudacteon species that attack fire ants appear to be specific to fire ants. The host specificity of several parasitic Pseudacteon flies in South America was tested in the field with 23 species of ants from 13 genera. As expected, these flies were attracted only to Solenopsis fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. F. Williams, S. D. Porter and J. A. Briano
TI  - Fire ant biological control studies in the U.S. with Thelohania solenopsae and Solenopsis daguerrei.  [abstract]
1997;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus floridanus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; Texas; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; biocontrol; biological control agents; Thelohania solenopsae; microsporidiosis; entomopathogenic protozoa; pathogenicity; natural enemies; parasites; parasitism; Solenopsis daguerrei; invasive species; 
AB  - The microsporidium, Thelohania solenopsae, (Microsporida: Thelohaniidae) an obligate intracellular pathogen was discovered by Allen and Buren in 1974 in alcohol-preserved specimens of Solenopsis invicta collected in Mato Grosso, Brazil, in 1973. It was also found infecting colonies of the black imported fire ant, Solenopsis richteri, in Argentina and is one of the most common pathogens in fire ants in Brazil and Argentina. In 1996, during a survey for pathogens in polygyne field-collected colonies in the U.S., we discovered a microsporidium in workers of S. invicta found along a roadside (US 441) by Payne's Prairie 8 km south of Gainesville, Florida. This microsporidian species isolated from S. invicta in Florida was determined to be dimorphic with features similar to those described for T. solenopsae. In addition to the morphological data, the sequence of the 16s rRNA gene of the Florida microsporidium was determined. Sequence comparisons of the 16s rRNA genes of T. solenopsae and the microsporidium found in S. invicta populations in Florida were almost identical. Therefore, as indicated by this species diagnostics, we have the first evidence of T. solenopsae infection in S. invicta in the U.S.  Following this discovery, a total of 379 colonies was excavated in north central Florida and 86 (23 %) of these were infected. We also examined polygynous colonies from several other sites in the southern U.S. and found additional infections at Hurley, MS, the site from which polygynous colonies were first reported in the U.S., Gulfport, MS and Thorndale, TX. In addition, other ant species were also examined: S. geminata, Dorymyrmex bureni, Pheidole metallescens, Pheidole moerens, Camponotus jloridanus, Trachymynnex septentrionalis, and Brachymyrmex depilis; all were negative for the microsporidium. Previously, we found only polygynous S. invicta colonies to be infected with T. solenopsae, however, we recently found a monogyne colony site in Florida with the infection. Also, we have surveyed much fewer monogyne sites than polygyne areas. The detrimental effects of this pathogen on S. invicta field colonies in the U.S. are not known at present but of the original 30 field-collected colonies that were infected and returned to the laboratory, all were completely without brood and had only a few workers and queens remaining after 12 months. This is in contrast to healthy field-collected colonies that have not only survived in our laboratory for several years without loss of brood but have increased in size. We also found T. solenopsae infected colonies from newly-mated queens that we had collected in 1994 around Gainesville, FL. These colonies were being maintained in our laboratory and were the oldest S. invicta colonies we had in the lab rearing rooms. The infected colonies where in very poor condition and most of them contained the large binucleated spores of T, solenopsae. Some of the other data that we have obtained on T. solenopsae in the U.S. is the percent of infection rates of queens (31 %), workers (72%), larvae (54 %) and colonies (23 %). Finally, queens in infected colonies weighed 50% less than queens in noninfected colonies.  The presence of the parasitic ant, Solenopsis daguerrei, in fire ant colonies has detrimental effects on colony growth and the proportion of sexual reproductives produced in the colony. S. daguerrei queens enter fire ant colonies and attach themselves to the mother queen. Previous studies have demonstrated that this parasite inhibits the fire ant mother queen and her egg production, thus causing the ant colony to collapse and eventually die out.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Biology of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) and their relationships to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
1975;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; scientific; diet; symbiont; myrmecophile; symphile; strigilation; predator; scavenger; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Martinezia dutertrei; Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis; feeding relationship; feces; flight period; ovarian development; reproductive period; biocontrol; blacklight traps; pitfall traps; radioisotope; phosphorus-32; 32P; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Fire ant myrmecophiles: behavior of Myrmecosaurus ferrugineus Bruch (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae) with comments on its abundance
SO  - Sociobiology 1980;5:63-68
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; scientific; distribution; population; behavior; trophallaxis; grooming; symbiont; myrmecophile; Coleoptera; Staphylinidae; Myrmecosaurus ferrugineus; 
AB  - Grooming behavior of Myrmecosaurus ferrugineus Bruch is described. The beetle is fed by trophallaxis from the epipharynx of worker red imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren. Predation on any ant caste by the staphylinid was not observed. Examination of all collection records indicate that this staphylinid is widespread but uncommon. The low abundance and lack of predatory behavior in this beetle precludes its use in a biological program for fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Comparison of the ecology of Red Imported Fire Ants in North and South America
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1983;66(1):101-111
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Conomyrma; Paratrechina fulva; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; California; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; Puerto Rico; South Carolina; Texas; South America; Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Mato Grosso; Paraguay; scientific; mating; flight; season; temperature; rainfall; community structure; habitat; cerrado; pantanal; floating; distribution; population; mound; dispersal; bait; chemical control; quarantine; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Bibliography of imported fire ants and their control: Second Supplement
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1986;69:394-415
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; bibliography; chemistry; biology; taxonomy; morphology; physiology; genetics; ecology; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite; predator; impact; agricultural; medical; urban; chemical control; biocontrol; 
AB  - *[The literature search for this bibliography was completed in October 1985.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Observations on the biology and ecology of fire ants in Brazil
SO  - Fire ants and leaf cutting ants: Biology and management 1986:88-103
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; scientific; prey; diet; colony size; colony longevity; mating; flight; population; distribution; mound; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; Microsporida; Thelohania solenopsae; Vairimorpha; Neogregarinida; Mattesia; nematode; parasite; Diplopoda; millipede; predator; scavenger; Acarina; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Pselaphidae; Scarabaeidae; Staphylinidae; Tenebrionidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Hymenoptera; Bethylidae; Diapriidae; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Lepidoptera; Strepsiptera; Thysanura; tending Hemiptera; extrafloral nectaries; bait; 
AB  - S. invicta builds mounds in Brazil equal in size to the large mounds built in the United States, provide similar soil types are compared.  The numbers of ants in colonies in Brazil are at least equal to the numbers found in colonies in the United States.  Thenumbers of alates in mounds in Brazil are similar to numbers in the U.S.  The importance of the differences between Brazilian & North American population concerning the time of day of mating flights has not been established.  S. invicta is not common in termite mounds in Mato Grosso.  S. invicta feeds on arthropods, carrion, garbage, meat and honey baits, and extrafloral nectaries, and tend aphids as they do in the U.S.  Colony densities in Brazil can be similar to those in the U.S. where similar habitats are considered.  The presence of pathogens and/or inquilines is one of the many factors influencing S. invicta populations in Brazil.  S. invicta colonies in Brazil probably have a life span equal to the life span of colonies in the U.S.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Status of the Search for Natural Control Agents in South America
1986;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; distribution; nest; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; predator; parasite; pathogen; virus; fungus; microsporidan; neogregarine; nematode; parasite; scavenger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Staphylinidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; 
AB  - Brief accounts are given of the known pathogens, parasites, and predators of the fire ants in Mato Grosso, Brazil.  The pathogens include two microsporidians, one neogregarine, and one nematode.  Phorid flies, eucharaitid wasps, parasitic ants, predaceous scarab beetles, hister beetles, chrysomelid beetle larvae, thysanura, and millipedes have been collected from fire ant nests in Brazil.  Their potential for use in a biological control program for fire ants in the U.S. is discussed.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - USDA Fire Ant Program: Ecology, Radioisotope studies, and survey of biological control agents of fire ants in Brazil
1988;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; ecology; population; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; fungus; Microsporida; Thelohania solenopsae; Vairimorpha; Neogregarinida; Mattesia geminata; nematode; Mermithoidea; Tetradonematidae; parasite; predator; scavenger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Martinezia dutertrei; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Lygaeidae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Survey of biological control agents in Brazil - a final report, with comments on preliminary research in Argentina
1988;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis quicquecuspis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; polygyny; nest; mound; symbiont; myrmecophile; predator; parasite; pathogen; virus; fungus; microsporidan; neogregarine; nematode; parasite; scavenger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Pselaphidae; Scarabaeidae; Staphylinidae; Tenebrionidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Lygaeidae; Hymenoptera; Bethylidae; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Lepidoptera; Thysanura; biocontrol; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Behavioral interactions between ants and their parasites
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1989;72(1):43-51
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Atta cephalotes; Bothriomyrmex decapitans; Camponotus; Eciton dulcius crassinode; Iridomyrmex cordatus; Lasius alienus; Lasius mixtus; Lasius niger; Lasius reginae; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole fervida; Pheidologeton; Pseudomyrmex; Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Tapinoma; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; Asia; Europe; North America; South America; review; biology; ecology; behavior; parasite; ectoparasite; endoparasite; Acarina; Antennophoridae; Antennophorus uhlmanni; Macrochelidae; Macrocheles rettenmeyeri; Uropodidae; Cillibano comato; Diptera; Phoridae; Apocephalus aridus; Apodicrania termitophila; Hymenoptera; Aphidiidae; Aclitus sappaphis; Paralypis eikoae; Diapriidae; Plagiopria passerai; Plagiolepis pygmaea; Solenopsia imitatrix; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Schizaspidia tenuicornis; Strepsiptera; Myrmecolacidae; tending Hemiptera; biocontrol; 
AB  - Ectoparasitic and endoparasitic arthropods of ants include species of Acarina (Antennophoridae, Macrochelidae, Uropodidae), Strepsiptera, Myrmecolacidae, Hymenoptera (Diapriidae, Eucharitidae, Formicidae), and Diptera (Phoridae).  Variation in the style of ectoparasitism is illustrated by the different lifestages involved and differing effects on the hosts by parasitic ants and eucharitids.  Considerable variation in behavior occurs between related genera and species of phorids emphasizing the danger of over-generalization on the relationships of ants and their parasites.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Behavioral interactions of fire ants and their parasites, predators and inquilines
SO  - Applied myrmecology: a world perspective 1990:329-344
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Atta; Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Dorylinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Asia; Ceylon; North America; South America; review; biology; ecology; behavior; strigilation; symbiont; myrmecophile; inquiline; phoresy; parasite; predator; Acarina; Tarsonemidae; Uropodidae; Oplitis exopodi; Oplitis virgilinus; Diplopoda; millipede; Calyptodesmus sanctus; Calyptodesmus schubarti; Blattaria; Atticolidae; Coleoptera; Anthicidae; Carabidae; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Melandryidae; Pselaphidae; Ctenisis fasciculata; Eurhexius putzeysi; Fustiger elegans; Metopioxys gallardoi; Pselaphomorphus bruchi; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Martinezia dutertrei; Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis; Myrmecaphodius proseni; Rhyssemus neglectus; Scydmaenidae; Staphylinidae; Dinardopsis; Dinusella; Euthorax; Myrmecosaurus ferrugineus; Oxypoda; Pella; Tenebrionidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Apodicrania termitophila; Commoptera solenopsidis; Pseudacteon crawfordii; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon spatulatus; Syrphidae; Hemiptera; Cydnidae; Lygaeidae; Neoblissus parasitaster; Reduviidae; Acanthaspis concinnula; Tingidae; Vianaidinae; Anommatocoris coleopteratus; Homoptera; Cixiidae; Hymenoptera; Bethylidae; Ceraphronidae; Diapriidae; Eucharitidae; Orasema aenea; Orasema crassa; Orasema rapo; Ichneumonidae; Lepidoptera; Lycaenidae; Riodininae; Eurybia elvina; Hameris epulus signatus; Orthoptera; Gryllidae; Myrmecophilidae; Myrmecophilia nebrascensis; Myrmecophilia pergandei; cricket; Strepsiptera; Myrmecolacidae; Thysanura; Nicoletiidae; Grassiella praestans; Mirolepisma; Prolepismina; biocontrol; 
AB  - *[Calyptodesmus sanctus = Calyptodesmus schubarti, Martinezia dutertrei = Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Urban pest control annotated bibliography: III - Pest ants
1992;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Acanthomyops; Atta texana; Camponotus; Conomyrma; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Formica; Iridomyrmex humilis; Linepithema humile; Lasius; Liometopum occidentale; Monomorium minimum; Monomorium pharaonis; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheidole; Pogonomyrmex; Prenolepis imparis; Pseudomyrmex; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis molesta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Tapinoma sessile; Technomyrmex albipes; Tetramorium caespitum; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; Canada; USA; Hawaii; review; bibliography; biology; taxonomy; identification; ecology; distribution; behavior; impact; medical; urban; chemical control; chemical control; reinfestation; 
AB  - *[literature review through April 1991.  References placed in reference texts, general references (monographs & reviews; current literature), argentine ants, carpenter ants, fire ants, pharaoh ant, Hawaii, other ants, audio-visual materials.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Update on mating flight studies, 1991-1992.  [abstract]
1992;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; females; males; mating; flights; sex ratio; flight trap; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - The effects on non-target ants of pre- and post-mating flight toxicant applications for fire control.  [abstract]
1992;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Aphaenogaster nr. rudis; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus floridanus; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Conomyrma bureni; Crematogaster clara; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Hypoponera opaciceps; Odontomachus brunneuss; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina vividula; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Prenolepis imparis; Pseudomyrmex brunneus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Strumigenys louisianae; Tetramorium simillimum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; mounds; species occurrence; chemical control; pitfall traps; native species; invasive species; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - The Gainesville transect: Twenty-one years of RIFA population increases
1993;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; distribution; abundance; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Impact of the red imported fire ant on native ant species in Florida
SO  - Exotic ants. Biology, impact, and control of introduced species 1994:269-281
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Aphaenogaster flemingi; Aphaenogaster floridana; Aphaenogaster fulva; Aphaenogaster nr. rudis; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus decipiens; Camponotus floridanus; Camponotus socius; Cardiocondyla ectopia; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; Cardiocondyla venustula; Cardiocondyla wroughtoni; Conomyrma bureni; Conomyrma medeis; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Crematogaster atkinsoni; Crematogaster lineolata; Crematogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Forelius pruinosus; Formica archboldi; Formica pallidefulva; Hypoponera opaciceps; Lasius alienus; Leptothorax pergandei; Monomorium viridum; Odontomachus brunneus; Paratrechina bourbonica; Paratrechina concinna; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina longicornis; Paratrechina parvula; Paratrechina vividula; Pheidole carrolli; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Pheidole vinelandica; Prenolepis imparis; Pseudomyrmex ejectus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis globularia littoralis; Solenopsis picta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Solenopsis nr. truncorum; Tetramorium bicarinatum; Tetramorium lanuginosum; Tetramorium simillimum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Trichoscapa membranifera; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; season; ecology; distribution; population; community; interspecific interactions; diversity; foraging; bait; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik
TI  - Effects of fire ant invasion on other ants.  [abstract]
1997;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; ecology; population density; community ecology; impact; ecological; invasive species; 
AB  - Ants were sampled periodically from March 1972 to September 1992 on roadside stations using hamburger and honey baits. During 68 sampling periods over 21 years, 13,600 bait samples and 990,079 specimens were collected and identified, representing 55 species in 22 genera in 5 subfamilies. More than one ant species was collected on approximately 33% of the baits; 16% of the baits were blank. Red Imported Fire Ants (Solenopsis invicta), S. geminata and Pheidole dentata were the 3 major species collected on the transect over the years in total occurrences (58.33%) and specimens (82.5%).  The RlFA population has gradually increased until in September 1992 it dominated the ant fauna: 43.3% of the sample occurrences (maximum 55.8% in March 1990 & April 1992), 63.1 % of the sample specimens (maximum 74.3% in April 1992), and 50 sites (maximum 59  sites in April 1991). The increase occurred in spite of high populations of S. geminata and P. dentata, two species which are predaceous on newly-mated RIFA queens. RlFA is an r-strategist or weed species with great reinfestation abilities, enabling it to invade, establish, and rebuild populations quickly.  Once established, it persists and dominates its habitat, becoming a keystone species and influencing community structure.  Both S. geminata and P. dentata showed significant negative correlations (P<0.01) when compared to RlFA in percent occurrences, in specimens, and in number of sites occupied. S. geminata is able to overcome moderate disturbance, and persist and flourish in the presence of the RlFA invasion. S. geminata populations can return to pre-disturbance levels if they are not displaced by competitors.  Respite having an alarm-recruitment defense system specific to Solenopsis species ants, P. dentata has decreased wherever it has been studied following RlFA invasion. This decrease is at least partially attributable to the superior recruitment and displacement abilities of RlFA over P. dentata.  An additional 13 species occurred often enough to allow calculation of significant correlations against occurrences. These species can be divided into native ants and introduced ants. Each group had species which were either negatively or positively correlated with the ranked percent occurrences of RIFA.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, C. Allen, E. Forys and R. J. Brenner
TI  - Distribution of imported fire ants in the Florida Keys.  [abstract]
1997;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; ecology; community ecology; population ecology; habitats; invasive species; ecological invasion; endangered species; 
AB  - The Florida keys represent an unique tropical habitat in the United States and are home to a variety of endangered wildlife. Red imported fire ants have only been reported from a few locations in the Keys, mainly in highly disturbed areas such as parking lots or road sides. As part of a larger study on the effects of imported fire ants of endangered wildlife, we realized that it was necessary to determine the true distribution of the ants in the keys as well as their presence in various habitats.  Keys and habitats were selected for sampling based on several criteria. Primarily, habitats in protected wildlife or conservation areas inhabited by endangered species (sea turtle nesting sites, Key deer, Salt Marsh rabbits, Stock lsland tree snail, Key Largo wood rat) were included. Secondly, habitats which were being considered for the reintroduction of endangered species, such as the Stock lsland tree snail were included. Ants were sampled primarily with terrestrial baits. A 314-inch diameter ground meat-ball and a 1-inch honeysoaked cotton wick were placed separately on the ground on 1-inch square heavy aluminumfoil. The two baits were placed 8-12 inches apart at each sampling site. Arboreal baits consisting of a meatball or honey-wick (in separate plastic cups) were placed in bushes or trees 3-7 feet of the ground. Arboreal baits were only used in potential snail habitats or in mangroves with mosquito ditches. Test-tube pitfalls containing propylene glycol were used in snail habitat. When arboreal baits or pitfalls were used, they were placed at the same  relative locations as the terrestrial baits.  Over 3,000 samples from 120+ locations were collected and processed. Sampling with baits  (terrestrial or arboreal) and pitfall traps demonstrate that fire ants have penetrated some undisturbed areas. Berm (sea turtle nesting sites), transition-zone (Salt Marsh rabbits), and hammocks and pine woods (Key deer, Key Largo wood rat) were found to be infested on several keys. Three sites being considered for the reintroduction of the endangered Stock Islanct tree snail, Stock lsland Botanical Park, Little Hammaca City Park on Key West, and Nature Conservancy property on Little Torch Key were all found to harbor RIFA.  The information obtained in the Keys will be used by our cooperators in selecting habitats for the re-establishment of the endangered Stock lsland tree snail in protected habitats. The presence of RlFA in some of these habitats complicates the reintroduction process and may require the judicious use of chemical treatment for RlFA control.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik and C. R. Allen
TI  - Update on fire ants, sea turtles, and alligators.  [abstract]
1996;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; ecological; wildlife; green sea turtle; loggerhead sea turtle; turtle nests; alligator; alligator nests; endangered species; 
AB  - Red Imported Fire Ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren, are reported in green and loggerhead sea turtle nests in the Florida Keys.  Preliminary tests conducted with non-viable eggs indicated the RIFA could not breach intact eggs. The presence of RIFA in alligator nests in Florida was confirmed & we initiated tests to determine predation on hatchlings.  Laboratory tests indicate that RIFA do not invade unbreached eggs.  Alligator eggs, hatching under laboratory conditions in RIFA mounds, do suffer mortality and experience statically significant reduction in growth.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, C. R. Allen, R. J. Brenner, E. A. Forys, D. P. Jouvenaz and R. S. Lutz
TI  - Red imported fire ants: impact on biodiversity
SO  - Am. Entomol. 2001;47(1):16-23
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; review; infestation; introduced species; biodiversity; impact; ecological; mammals; birds; invertebrates; invasive species; 
AB  - This paper reviews the research on the actual and suspected impacts of red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) on the biodiversity of endangered vertebrates and invertebrates and their habitats.
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks and W. F. Buren
TI  - First report of Pheidole moerens in Florida (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - U.S. Dep. Agric. Coop. Econ. Insect Rep. 1975;25:906
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole moerens; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; scientific; taxonomy; key; distribution; bait; 
AB  - *[characters are given to distinguish P. moerens from P. floridana.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks and D. H. Habeck
TI  - Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Flight periods of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae)
SO  - Coleop. Bull. 1978;32(1):59-64
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; predator; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis; 
AB  - Flight periods of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville in Florida were determined by using blacklight traps. E. castanea was collected from February through October; but the main flight period extended from May through September. The peak flight period of M. excavaticollis occurred in June and July with almost continuous flights from May until October, and additional flights occurred in warm periods during the winter. No correlation was found between flight periods, air or soil temperatures, or rainfall. Also, no correlation was apparent between beetle flights and the mating flights of the host ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, F., 1983, Batesiana et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-153.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks, D. M. Hicks and J. K. Plumley
TI  - A simple inexpensive pitfall trap for collecting arthropods
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1972;55:115-116
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; scientific; methods; 
AB  - *[Lots of ants collected in traps.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks, D. M. Hicks and J. W. Summerlin
TI  - Fire ant myrmecophiles: new hosts and distribution of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae)
SO  - Coleop. Bull. 1977;31(4):329-334
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Iridomyrmex humilis; Linepithema humile; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Dolichoderinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; Texas; scientific; ecology; distribution; mound; dispersal; symbiont; myrmecophile; biocontrol; 
AB  - New ant hosts and distribution records from Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas are reported for Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) collected from nests of Solenopsis invicta Buren (red imported fire ant), S. richteri Forel (black imported fire ant), S. geminata F. (tropical fire ant), S. xyloni McCook (southern fire ant), and Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr) (argentine ant). New ant host and distribution records from Florida and Georgia are reported for Euparia castanea Serville collected from nests of S. geminata and S. xyloni. The occurrence of both species of beetle from the same nests of S. geminata and S. xyloni is reported for the first time. The range of M. excavaticollis is expanding while the range of E. castanea is decreasing. Both species of beetle occur in abandoned mounds of the host ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, F., 1983, Batesiana et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-153.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks, J. K. Plumley and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - Results of laboratory tests with additional candidate bait toxicants against the imported fire ant
1972;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; 
AB  - A screening program was initiated in 1970 to evaluate various candidate chemicals as potential replacements for mirex in baits for control of the imported fire ant.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks, J. K. Plumley and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - Red imported fire ant: Laboratory tests with additional candidate bait toxicants
SO  - J. Econ. Entomol. 1973;66(2):550
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; 
AB  - A screening program was initiated in 1970 to evaluate various candidate chemicals as potential replacements for mirex in baits for control of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, Buren.
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. A. Banks, W. B. Wheeler, D. P. Jouvenaz, C. H. Van Middelem and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - Mirex residues in nontarget organisms after application of experimental baits for fire ant control, Southwest Georgia--1971-72
SO  - Pestic. Monit. J. 1975;9:124-133; 1976. Errata 10: 31
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Georgia; scientific; nest; mound; chemical control; 
AB  - 4 formulations of mirex bait were applied to experimental plots.  Residues were found in crickets & other arthropods which often inhabit dead or abandoned fire ant mounds, which may contain dead ants or remnants of the IFA bait.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik and R. J. Brenner
TI  - Bait studies on fire ants and fire ant toxicants on Texas cave crickets and fish-bait crickets.  [abstract]
1998;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Texas; scientific; prey; foraging; cave systems; chemical control; non-target species; 
AB  - Field studies using attractant non-toxic baits demonstrated that fire ants foraged intensively in and around the caves. These studies also demonstrated that cave crickets emerged from the caves and foraged widely around the caves. The objectives were to assess susceptibity of endangered cave species to impact by fire ant and fire ant management practices and chemicals. As it was not feasible or legal to test endangered cave species, cave crickets, a scavenger species important in the cave food chain were used as a surrogate. The cave crickets live and reproduce in the caves and forage for food outside of the caves. Cave crickets were tested in two ways. Cave crickets were fed on specific numbers of bait granules to determine the risk Amdro bait poses to the crickets. Cave crickets were fed on Amdro poisoned fire ant cadavers, to determine if the movement of toxicants via scavengers into the cave systems was possible. Additional tests were conducted using fish-bait crickets as surrogates for cave crickets. Amdro granules were toxic to cave crickets and fish-bait crickets feeding on bait granules. Amdro poisoned fire ant cadavers did not pose a threat to the cave crickets. The ants could easily be controlled without affecting the cave crickets by restricting fire ant treatments to morning hours, thus allowing sufticient time for the fire ants to forage for and retrieve all of the bait particles before the cave crickets emerge from the caves during the night.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, R. J. Brenner, D. A. Focks, D. F. Williams and C. Allen
TI  - Impact of the imported fire ant on biodiversity: Standarized spatial monitoring of foraging interactions.  [abstract]
1998;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Odontomachus; Paratrechina concinna; Paratrechina faisonensis; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole morrisi; Pheidole moerens; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis littoralis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; Florida; Texas; scientific; prey; foraging; cave systems; chemical control; non-target species; 
AB  - We compare two bait/monitoring approaches, used in combination with spatial statistical analysis, to assess relative abundance and foraging profiles of several species of ants, setting the stage for future comparisons with the introduction of interventions to mitigate fire ant populations and enhance/safeguard biodiversity of the ecosystem.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, W. F. Buren, E. E. Grissell and T. Carlysle
TI  - The fire ants (Solenopsis) of Florida (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
1976;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Solenopsis (Euophthalma); Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; South Carolina; Texas; extension; biology; morphology; taxonomy; key; ecology; distribution; impact; agricultural; medical; urban; chemical control; 
AB  - A key is given to 3 subgenera of Solenopsis and to the 3 species of the genus that are found in Florida: S. invicta Buren, S. geminata (F.), and (1 record only) S. xyloni McCook. Other species found elsewhere in the United States, S. richteri Forel and S. aurea Wheeler, are reviewed. Further distinguishing characters for identification of the Florida species are presented, and characters previously used that are now invalid are enumerated. Notes are given from the literature on the distribution, biology, economic importance and control of the Florida species. As well as causing itching, pustules and occasionally death in man by biting, all 3 species (especially S. invicta) have been known to cause economic losses in the harvesting of soy beans, hay and other crops and in the death of young livestock and game birds. Mirex in a bait at 0.3% for application by aircraft at 1.25 lb bait/acre or at 0.15% for ground application at 2.5 lb bait/acre or alternatively chlordane as a drench for nursery stock or as dusts or granules for application on non-food areas such as lawns and roadsides at 1.5 lb toxicant/acre, are recommended for chemical control.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, R. J. Burges and C. M. Blanton
TI  - Diurnal and seasonal differences in red imported fire ant roadside abundance
1984;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Prenolepis imparis; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; season; temperature; rainfall; habitat; distribution; population; 
AB  - One reason RIFA populations increase so rapidly may be their foraging success, which includes the ability to locate potential food resources, recruit foragers, and displace competitors. This study addresses this option by monitoring patterns of RIFA foraging at roadside baits throughout the day and year. Timing of foraging may determine or depend on activity patterns of dominate or aggressive ants or other "enemies" and temperature or rainfall.  Sampling with honey-agar and hamburger baits was carried out at 9AM, 3PM, 9PM, and the following 3AM on 10 dates from July 1977 to July 1978.  The greatest values for RIFA foraging are usually for nighttime sampling (9PM and 3AM). The lowest values for RIFA foraging are usually for sampling at 3PM and during the winter months. RIFA occurs approximately twice as often in the summer as in the winter. Relative to the other ant species sampled, RIFA forages: 1) more at night than in the daytime, 2) more in March than any other individual species. This behavior may give RIFA a head start on spring population buildup. Peak foraging of native fire ants (NFA) (s. geminata) and RIFA occurs in the warm summer months. Their occurrences at baits are not correlated because NFA forages most in the daytime and RIFA most at night. Peak foraging of Pheidole dentata Mayr and Prenolepis imparis (Say) occurs in the fall and winter, respectively. They may be less likely than NFA to compete directly with RIFA for food.  No correlation could be found with relative humidity, rainfall, total radiation, or soil temperature.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, R. J. Burges and C. M. Blanton
TI  - A technique for marking fire ants.  [abstract]
1984;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; marking; 
AB  - Markal/R ball point paint markers were used to mark RIFA workers. Dots of blue, red, white, yellow, orange, or green paint were placed on seven individual workers (one color per ant). Forty-two ants were marked in each of six queen-right colonies for a total of 252 marked ants. The ants were grasped with forceps and the top of the gaster touched into a drop of paint. The marked ants were returned to the colony while the paint was still wet.  The colonies were checked daily for three days, then biweekly until less than one percent of the marked ants were recovered in two consecutive examinations. The marks were slowly lost over a 100 day period with one mark lasting 119 days. No mortality could be attributed to the paint. No attempt was made to mark newly-eclosed workers. Large chips of paint were rarely found (three times). Marked dead ants were found nine percent (23 out of 252 workers) of the time. No differences were noted in the longevity of anyone color.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, R. J. Burges, C. M. Blanton and D. A. Focks
TI  - An improved and quantified technique for marking individual fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2000;83(1):74-78
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; marking; techniques; paints; retention; longevity; regression analysis; mathematical models; 
AB  - Individual fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren were marked with dots of Markal brand Ball Point Paint Markers. The marked ants were returned to the colony while the paint was still wet. The marks were slowly lost over a 100-day period with one mark lasting 119 days. No mortality could be attributed to the paint. The proportion of ants retaining marks over time can be expressed as a simple exponential decay model: proportion with marks = 0.7665 * exp (-0.0175 * time in days). The technique will be useful in assessing basic behavioral characteristics, such as polygyne versus monogyne interactions, nestmate discrimination, foraging profiles, and in assessing impact of candidate biological control organisms on behavior and survivorship of fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik and D. H. Habeck
TI  - Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Breeding period and ovariole number in Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae)
SO  - Coleop. Bull. 1977;31(4):335-338
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; season; mound; symbiont; myrmecophile; blacklight traps; pitfall traps; 
AB  - Dissection of female Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville from black light collections indicated that both species flew in all stages of ovarian development. Dissection of beetles collected from light traps, ant mounds, pitfall traps, and on top of ant mounds suggested that M. excavaticollis may breed continuously during the year. The maximum number of mature eggs found in M. excavaticollis was 26, with most specimens containing 12 or fewer. Dissection of E. castanea collected from ant mounds and light traps indicated that this species too may breed continuously throughout the year. The maximum number of eggs observed in E. castanea was 18. There were 6 ovarioles per ovary in both species.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, F., 1983, Batesiana et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-153.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, D. P. Jouvenaz, W. A. Banks, C. S. Lofgren and A. C. Pereira
TI  - Biological control agents of fire ants in Brasil.  [abstract]
1987;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; scientific; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; fungus; Microsporida; Neogregarinida; nematode; parasite; predator; scavenger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Lygaeidae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik, D. P. Jouvenaz, W. A. Banks and A. C. Pereira
TI  - Biological control agents of fire ants in Brasil.  [abstract]
1986;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite; predator; virus; fungus; microsporidan; neogregarine; nematode; parasite; scavenger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Staphylinidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; 
AB  - Full paper = Wojcik et al., 1987, Biological control agents of fire ants in Brazil, p. 627-628, In Eder, J. & Rembold, H. (ed), Chemistry and biology of social insects. Verlag J. Peperny, München.  757 p.
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, D. P. Jouvenaz, W. A. Banks and A. C. Pereira
TI  - Biological control agents of fire ants in Brazil
SO  - Chemistry and biology of social insects 1987:627-628
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; scientific; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; fungus; Microsporida; Thelohania solenopsae; Vairimorpha; Neogregarinida; Mattesia geminata; nematode; Mermithoidea; Tetradonematidae; parasite; predator; scavenger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Martinezia; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Lygaeidae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; 
AB  - Brief accounts are given of the known pathogens, parasites, and predators of the fire ants in Mato Grosso, Brazil.  The pathogens include two microsporidians, one neogregarine, and one nematode.  Phorid flies, eucharaitid wasps, parasitic ants, predaceous scarab beetles, hister beetles, chrysomelid beetle larvae, thysanura, and millipedes have been collected from fire ant nests in Brazil.  Their potential for use in a biological control program for fire ants in the U.S. is discussed.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, D. P. Jouvenaz and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - First report of a parasitic fly (Diptera: Phoridae) from a red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) alate female (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 1987;70(1):181-182
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; biocontrol; 
AB  - A puparium of a fly (Diptera: Phoridae) was dissected from the gaster of an alate female of Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), collected from a fire ant colony in Mato Grosso, Brazil.  This is the first report of an internal parasite in alate females from any fire ant species.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik, D. P. Jouvenaz and R. S. Patterson
TI  - Nematode Parasites of Fire Ants from South America
1991;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; Uruguay; scientific; caste; mound; colony; morphology; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; nematode; pathogen; Mermithoidea; mermithid nematode; Tetradonematidae; Tetradonema; biocontrol; disease transmission; biocontrol; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik and C. S. Lofgren
TI  - Bibliography of imported fire ants and their control: First supplement
SO  - Bull. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1982;28(3):269-276
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; bibliography; chemistry; biology; taxonomy; morphology; physiology; genetics; ecology; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite; predator; impact; agricultural; medical; urban; chemical control; biocontrol; 
AB  - The red and black imported fire ants (IFA), Solenapsis invicta Buren and S. richteri Forel, now occupy more than 52 million ha in the southern United States. The literature on these controversial pests was collected in a bibliography by Banks et al. in 1978 (26). Since that bibliography was compiled, the flow of literature on IFA has increased to such an extent that a supplement is warranted.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.
AU  - D. P. Wojcik and M. A. Naves
TI  - Biology of Calyptodesmus sanctus (Diplopoda: Pyrgodesmidae) a facultative myrmecophile introduced into the United States
SO  - Sociobiology 1992;20(1):77-87
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Camponotus floridanus; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Pheidole crassicornis; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole lamia; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; scientific; biology; habitat; nests; distribution; interspecific interactions; behavior; feeding; detritivores; scavenging; defensive; symbiont; myrmecophile; Calyptodesmus sanctus; Calyptodesmus schubarti; collecting; pitfall; radioisotope; radioisotope; phosphorus-32; 32P; introduced species; 
AB  - The introduced millipede Calyptodesmus sanctus Schubart was collected in active nests of Pheidole crassicornis Emery, P. dentata Mayr, P. floridana Emery, P. lamia Wheeler, P. metallescens Emery, P. moerens Wheeler, Solenopsis geminata (F.), S. invicta Buren, Cyphomyrmex rimosus (Spinola), Cyphomyrmex sp. and Camponotus floridanus (Buckley) as well as in abandoned S. geminata mounds, rotten logs, leaf litter, and pitfall traps in Florida and Georgia. Field and laboratory observations indicate that this millipede is a facultative myrmecophile with no preference for any specific host.  Laboratory studies using 32Phosphorus demonstrate feeding on dead ants, indicating it is a scavenger.  The millipedes also ate organic materials in the laboratory.  The use of a defensive secretion is described.  Collection data indicate that this millipede is relatively common in Florida and Georgia, but has a patchy distribution.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          **[Calyptodesmus sanctus = Calyptodesmus schubarti.]
AU  - D. P. Wojcik and R. S. Patterson
TI  - Studies of bait toxicants on red imported fire ants and non-target ants in South Florida, 1989-1991
1991;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Aphaenogaster nr. rudis; Brachymyrmex obscurior; Camponotus floridanus; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Conomyrma bureni; Crematogaster clara; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Formica archboldi; Hypoponera opaciceps; Neivamyrmex opacithorax; Odontomachus ruginodis; Paratrechina bourbonica; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Pseudomyrmex mexicanus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Strumigenys louisianae; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Tetramorium caldarium; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; bait toxicant; 
AB  - LogicR and AmdroR baits were applied as broadcast and single-mound treatments for control of imported fire ants in Caloosa park in Palm Beach County, Florida. Both baits were applied as a broadcast treatment using a tractor-mounted applicator at the label-recommended rate of 1.7 kg bait/ha (1 lb/acre). Both baits were also applied as a single-mound treatment by hand by 8 workers at the label-recommended rates of 1 to 5 tablespoons of bait per mound (amount applied depended on mound size). All blocks were treated on 15 February 1989. Each block was 1.6 to 2.4-ha (4 to 6 acres) and all were bounded by physical barriers (canal, woods, RR right-of-way, insecticide treated ball fields, or paved areas) which precluded immigration of fire ant colonies. An untreated check block was set up in Lake Ida Park, Delray Beach, ca. 2 km south of Caloosa Park.  RIFA were monitored by mound counts.  Non-target ants were monitored using pitfall traps.  26 species of ants in 18 genera in 6 subfamilies were collected in pitfall traps.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - D. P. Wojcik and R. S. Patterson
TI  - Seasonality of RIFA mating flights
1993;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; females; males; mating; flights; sex ratio; season; flight trap; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik and S. D. Porter
TI  - Comprehensive literature database for the imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta and Solenopsis richteri
SO  - FORMIS: A master bibliography of ant literature 1997;MH  - Universal: ant; Formicidae; Taxonomic: Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; etc. including all other ant genera; species; & subfamilies; Geographic: North America; country; state; other continents & countries; Publication: scientific; popular; administrative; bibliography; review; extension; General; chemistry; cuticular hydrocarbons; pheromone; trail; brood; queen; colony odor; venom; biology; diet; prey; trophallaxis; food flow; oviposition; mating; flight; colony founding; colony development; polymorphism; caste; colony; colony growth; colony size; colony migration; polygyny; time; season; temperature; taxonomy; key; morphology; physiology; genetics; hybrid; allozyme; chromosome; diploid males; ecology; distribution; population; mound; nest; interspecific interactions; community; dispersal; floating; behavior; aggression; foraging; territory; nestmate recognition; stridulation; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite; predator; tending Hemiptera; impact; agricultural; urban; medical; economic; ecological; wildlife; control; chemical control; biocontrol; mechanical control; quarantine; reinfestation; methods; rearing; collecting; bait; pitfall; Specific: (as provided by authors); 
AB  - General Information - This database contains 2434 citations and 1370 abstracts to articles dealing with imported fire ants.     [NOTE: S. saevissima is S. invicta or S. richteri in North America.]     Updates - We plan to update the Fire Ant Literature Database every year or so. Please let us know if you would like an update. If you want to make sure your fire ant publications are included in the next update please send us copies with a note requesting inclusion in the database. We will also be happy to add abstracts to your papers if you send citations with abstracts to us on a computer disk in ASCII text format. If you have any problems, please call (352 374-5986) or write. We would also appreciate notification of any errors so the database can be corrected. Datafile Formats- This database can be sent in numerous formats. The Endnote format allows full manipulation of the literature database including- keyword searches, automatic construction of bibliographies, and formatting to fit journal styles. An EndNote® Viewer can be obtained from Niles & Associates by calling (510) 559-8592 or from the Web at http://www.niles.com. The comma delimited database file should be able to be imported into most standard database programs. The word processor file can be imported into word processors for simple keyword searches. Pro-Cite, Refer and other formats are available upon special request. The searchable version is also available on the web via Florida's WEBLUIS http://webluis.fcla.edu/cgi-bin/cgiwrap/fclwlv3/wlv3/DGref/DBFO/CM02/P1advsrch or David B. Taylor's Insect Bibliography internet site http://entobib.unl.edu
AU  - D. P. Wojcik and J. Smallwood
TI  - Red imported fire ant predation on kestrels
1993;MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; wildlife; bird; kestrel; chemical control; 

AU  - D. P. Wojcik, B. J. Smittle and H. L. Cromroy
TI  - Fire ant myrmecophiles: Feeding relationships of Martinezia dutertrei and Euparia castanea (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) with their ants hosts, Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
SO  - Insect. Soc. 1991;38(3):273-281
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; scientific; biology; trophallaxis; interspecific interactions; behavior; strigilation; symbiont; predator; myrmecophile; predator; scavenger; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Martinezia dutertrei; biocontrol; rearing; radioisotope; phosphorus-32; 32P; 
AB  - Feeding relationships of adult Euparia castanea Serville and Martinezia dutertrei Chalumeau with their ant hosts were studied in the laboratory using the radioactive tracer 32P. Euparia castanea was tested with Solenopsis geminata (F.), Martinezia dutertrei Chalumeau was tested with S. invicta Buren, S. richteri Forel, and S. geminata. Unlabeled beetles were exposed to various radioisotope labeled conditions for 24 hr and then checked for acquired radioactivity. In whole colony tests, both species of beetles acquired radioactivity. M. dutertrei obtained food from live ants, but E. castanea did not. Both species of beetles ate ant larvae. E. castanea also obtained food from ant larvae by strigilation. Neither species of beetle fed on ant feces or other secretions on the substrate. Both species of beetles obtained food by strigilation from fresh and decomposed worker ant cadavers. M. dutertrei also ate both kinds of ant cadavers. Both species of beetles also ate dead house flies, indicative of scavenging or feeding on ant booty. M. dutertrei showed no preference for any particular ant species. Ants did not obtain food by trophallaxis or glandular secretion from either species of beetle.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, F., 1983, Batesiana  et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-153.]
AU  - Ł. Wójcik, M. Chęć, P. Skowronek, M. Grabowski, K. Persona and A. Strachecka
TI  - Do the different life history strategies of ants and honeybees determine fat body morphology?
SO  - Arthropod Struct. Dev. 2022;69, 101186:9 p.
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Formica cinerea; Formica (Seviformica) cinerea; Formicinae; Europe; Poland; scientific; life history; physiology; morphology; fat body; trophocytes; oenocytes; binucleated oenocytes; heart; foraging; arthropods; Apis mellifera mellifera; 
AB  - The separation of two sister groups such as ants and bees in the Cretaceous involved the development of distinctive characteristics to occupy separate ecological niches. From the point of view of biology and ecology, it is important to see how different life history strategies affect the physiology of these insects. The fat body is the most metabolically important tissue in the organism of each insect. Therefore, we conducted a comparative analysis of the morphological image of the subcuticular fat body in different localisation/segments in Formica (Seviformica) cinerea and Apis mellifera mellifera foragers, because of the similarity of their functions in colonies. We observed that the fat bodies of ants and bees were composed of the same cell types: trophocytes and oenocytes. However, in each of the segments, the fat body cells in ants were bigger and there were fewer of them in comparison with bees. The dorsal part of the fat body of ants had a bilayer structure, where the outer layer was formed by binucleated oenocytes. Binucleated oenocytes were also found in the inner layer near the heart and tracheole. In bees, the fat body was unilayered and the trophocytes and oenocytes were present side by side. The similarities and, in particular, the differences in the structure of the fat body are the adaptation of these sister groups to life in a diverse environment.
AU  - C. T. Wuellner, S. D. Porter and L. E. Gilbert
TI  - Eclosion, mating, and grooming behavior of the parasitoid fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae)
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2002;85(4):563-566
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biocontrol; mass rearing; 
AB  - Phorid flies from the genus Pseudacteon are parasitoids of Solenopsis ants.  Recent efforts of controlling imported fire ants in the United States have focused on rearing and releasing these flies as biocontrol agents.  We studied eclosion, mating, and grooming behavior of Pseudacteon curvatus in an effort to increase understanding of its biology.  The sex ratio of eclosing flies in the lab was 1:1. The flies emerged only in the morning and were protandrous.  Mating in the lab occurred on the substrate and did not require disturbed ants.  Males and probably also females mated multiply.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - A. A. Zacaro and S. D. Porter
TI  - First report on the ultrastructure (TEM) of a truly parasitic phorid: the ovary of the scuttle fly Pseudacteon solenopsidis Schmitz (Diptera: Phoridae)
SO  - Acta Microscop. 1997;6B:622-623
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; biocontrol; morphology; ultrastructure; ovary; 

AU  - A. A. Zacaro and S. D. Porter
TI  - Female reproductive system of the scuttle fly Pseudacteon wasmanni Borgmeier Diptera, Phoridae.  [abstract]
SO  - Braz. J. Morph. Sci. 1997;14(1):95-95
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon wasmanni; ovary; ovipositor; scuttle Fly; decapitating fly; 

AU  - A. A. Zacaro and S. D. Porter
TI  - Female reproductive system of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon wasmanni Schmitz (Diptera: Phoridae)
SO  - Arthropod Struct. Dev. 2003;31(4):329-337
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon wasmanni; ovary; ovipositor; scuttle Fly; decapitating fly; 
AB  - Pseudacteon wasmanni is a South American decapitating fly that parasitizes workers of Solenopsis fire ants.  We used light microscopy (historesin serial-sectioning stained with Haematoxylin/Eosin) and scanning electron microscopy to show and analyze internal and whole external views of the female reproductive system.  All specimens analyzed (n=9) by light microscopy showed post-vitellogenic oocytes inside the ovaries.  The lack of typical follicles (oocyte-nurse cell complexes) in all specimens suggests that oogenesis occurs during the pupal stage.  The total number of eggs found ranged from 31 to 280 (X= 142 +- 73, SD).  The egg has a slugform or torpedo shape (about 130 by 20 µm) with a pointed apex at the posterior pole as defined by the fly; the micropyle appears to be in a depression or invagination at the anterior pole.  An acute hypodermic-like ovipositor is evaginated from the hard sclerotized external genitalia during egg laying.  The existence of a muscular bulb associated with the end of the common oviduct suggests that the egg is injected into the ant's body by a strong contraction of the bulb which probably is stimulated by bending of several ventral sensilla.  During contraction, the abdomen extends out along a large fold between the 6th and 7th tergites in such a way that the sclerotized genitalia is rotated ventrally into a slightly anterior orientation in preparation for oviposition.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - A. A. Zakharov and S. D. Porter
TI  - Spatial structure and patterns of foraging trails in polygyne fire ants (Formicidae: Solenopsis)
SO  - Rus. Entomol. J. 1996(1995);4(1):3-8
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; spatial structure; foraging pattern; foraging trail; polygyny; foraging tunnel system; nest; 
AB  - The trail vector method was used to study the spatial structure and patterns of foraging in the polygyne form of Solenopsis invicta. The phenomenon of secondary division of nest foraging areas is described. Zones of priority use and indefinite use are separated. Priority zones can be drawn not only around different nests but also around what appear to be foraging tunnel systems. The trail vector method does not damage ant nests and tunnels. It is possible to use it repeatedly for estimating in the same plot.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
AU  - R. Zhang, Y. Li, N. Liu and S. D. Porter
TI  - An overview of the red imported fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Mainland China
SO  - Florida Entomol. 2007;90(4):723-731
MH  - ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; Asia; China; scientific; distribution; impact; ecological; ecological invasion; medical; stings; chemical control; insecticides; bait; N-butyl perfluorooctane sulfonamide; pest management; pest control programs; governmental programs and projects; pest infestation; eradication program; fire ant control; invasive species; 
AB  - The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren is a serious invasive insect that is native to South America.  Its presence was officially announced in mainland China in Jan 2005. To date, it has been identified in 4 provinces in mainland China (Guangdong, Guangxi, Hunan, Fujian) in a total of 31 municipal districts. The total area reported to be infested by S. invicta in late 2006 was about 7,120 ha, mainly in Guangdong Province (6,332 ha). Most of the reported human stings are in the heavily infested area around Wuchuan City. The most commonly reported reactions have been abnormal redness of the skin, sterile pustules, hives, pain, and/or fever. It has been predicted that most of mainland China is viable habitat for red imported fire ants, including 25 of 31 provinces. The probable northern limit of expansion reaches Shandong, Tianjing, south Henan, and Shanxi provinces. Traditional and new insecticides including the bait N-butyl perfluorooctane sulfonamide and the contact insecticide Yichaoqing have been developed and used to control S. invicta. The Ministry of Agriculture and the Chinese government have established an 8-year eradication program (2006 to 2013) for S. invicta in China.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
